                                                                                                                                         1

             The Cell
  Dr_Hani Ahmed Alanqar

CONSULTANT OF PATHOLOGY IN ELSHIFA
                         HOSPITAL
  Introduction :

2

    Histology:(histo=tissue ,logia=branch of learning) is the
    science that deals with microscopic study of components
    of humans ,animal and plants which formed of cells
    ,tissues ,organs and systems.
    Cells:
    The cells is the structural and functional unit in the
    body.it is the smallest unit of living tissues in and animals
    that can exist independently
3

    Tissues:
    Cells are bound together with extracellular

      substances to form different types of tissues
    There are 4 basic types of tissues:
    Epithelial tissue
    Connective tissue
    Muscular tissue
    Nervous tissue
4  organs:

   Two or more tissues are combined to give
     larger functional units , which are the organs
     e.g kidney , liver ,and spleen

   Systems: several organs having interrelated
     functions collect to form systems e.g digestive
     system , urinary system

   For scientific or diagnostic purposes ,
     microscopic slide must be prepared from tissue
     and organs and stained to be viewed under
     the microscope
LIGHT MICROSCOPY

5

Conventional bright-field microscopy, as well as more
specialized applications like fluorescence, phase-
contrast, confocal, and polarizing microscopy, are all
based on the interaction of light with tissue components
and are used to reveal and study tissue features.
    CONVENTIONAL MICROSCOPY

6

    Are standard optical instruments for examination of
      histological specimens. The basic type is the light
      microscope, the other types are modifications of the
      original light microscope. Their usefulness depends
      on their magnification power and resolution power

    The magnification power : is the degree of
      enlargement.

    The resolution power :is the least distance between
      two points or objects that can be seen as two and
      not as one point .
7

   N.B : The limit of resolution of naked human eye =
   0.2mm .
   The limit of resolution of the light microscope =0.2µm.
   The limit of resolution of electron microscope =0.2nm .
   N.B : Milimeter (mm) =1000 micrometer (µm).

         Micrometer (µm) = 1000 nanometers (nm) .
         Nanometer (nm) = 10 angstroms(A) .
Fluorescence Microscopy

  8

When certain cellular substances are irradiated by light of a
proper wavelength, they emit light with a longer wavelength—
a phenomenon called fluorescence. In fluorescence microscopy,
tissue sections are usually irradiated with ultraviolet (UV) light
and the emission is in the visible portion of the spectrum. The
fluorescent substances appear bright on a dark background.
For fluorescent microscopy the instrument has a source of UV or
other light and filters that select rays of different wavelengths
emitted by the substances to be visualized.
Phase-Contrast Microscopy

  9

Unstained cells and tissue sections, which are usually
transparent and colorless, can be studied with these
modified light microscopes. Cellular detail is normally
difficult to see in unstained tissues because all parts of
the specimen have roughly similar optical densities.
Phase-contrast microscopy, however, uses a lens system
that produces visible images from transparent objects
and, importantly, can be used with living, cultured cells
 10

Phase-contrast microscopy is based on the principle
that light changes its speed when passing through
cellular and extracellular structures with different
refractive indices.
These changes are used by the phase-contrast system
to cause the structures to appear lighter or darker in
relation to each other. Because they allow the
examination of cells without fixation or staining, phase-
contrast microscopes are prominent tools in all cell
culture laboratories.
Polarizing Microscopy

 11

allows the recognition of stained or unstained structures made
of highly organized subunits. When normal light passes through
a polarizing filter, it exits vibrating in only one direction. If a
second filter is placed in the microscope above the first one,
with its main axis perpendicular to the first filter, no light
passes through. If tissue structures containing oriented
macromolecules are located between the two polarizing filters,
their repetitive structure rotates the axis of the light emerging
from the polarizer and they appear as bright structures
against a dark background . The ability to rotate the direction
of vibration of polarized light is called birefringence
Preparation of tissues for microscopic examination

 12

 There are four steps in tissue
  preparation:

 1-Fixation:stabilizes and preserves the
  tissue

 2-Embedding: converts the tissue into a
  solid form which can be sliced.

 3-Sectioning(slicing):providing the very
  thin specimens needed for microscopy.

 4-Staining:provides visual contrast and
  may help to identify specific tissue
  components.
13
14
The basic techniques used for
preparation of tissues:

 15

      1-microtechniques
      2-tissue culture
      3-spreading of blood films , bone marrow and

       tissue smear
                         1-microtechniques

      The paraffin technique (the most common used method)
      The celloidin technique (the most perfect used method)
      The freezing technique(the most rapid used method)
Enzyme Histochemistry

 16

Histochemical methods are also used to identify and
localize enzymes in cells and tissues.
To localize enzymes in tissue sections, special care must be
taken in fixation to preserve the enzyme activity. Usually, mild
aldehyde fixation is the preferred method. In these procedures,
the reaction product of the enzyme activity, rather than the
enzyme itself, is visualized. In general, a capture reagent,
either a dye or a heavy metal, is used to trap or bind the
reaction product of the enzyme by precipitation at the site of
reaction.
Immunocytochemistry

 17

The specificity of a reaction between an antigen and an
antibody is the underlying basis of immunocytochemistry.
Antibodies, also known as immunoglobulins, are glycoproteins
that are produced by specific cells of the immune system in
response to a foreign protein, or antigen. In the laboratory,
antibodies can be purified from the blood and conjugated
(attached) to a fluorescent dye. In general, fluorescent dyes
(fluorochromes) are chemicals that absorb light of different
wavelengths (e.g., ultraviolet light) and then emit visible light of
a specific wavelength (e.g., green, yellow, red).
18

Fluorescein, the most commonly used dye, absorbs ultraviolet
light and emits green light. Antibodies conjugated with
fluorescein can be applied to sections of lightly fixed or frozen
tissues on glass slides to localize an antigen in cells and tissues.

Two types of antibodies are used in immunocytochemistry:
polyclonal antibodies that are produced by immunized animals
and monoclonal antibodies that are produced by immortalized
(continuously replicating) antibody-producing
cell lines.
 19

In a typical procedure, a specific protein, such as actin, is
isolated from a muscle cell of one species, such as a rat, and
injected into the circulation of another species, such as a rabbit.
In the immunized rabbit, the rat’s actin molecules are
recognized by the rabbit immune system as a foreign antigen.
This recognition triggers a cascade of immunologic reactions
involving multiple groups (clones) of immune cells called B
lymphocytes. The cloning of B lymphocytes eventually leads to
the production of anti-actin antibodies.
Collectively, these polyclonal antibodies represent mixtures
of different antibodies produced by many clones of
B lymphocytes that each recognize different regions of the
actin molecule.
  20

The antibodies are then removed from the blood, purified, and
conjugated with a fluorescent dye. They can now be used to
locate actin molecules in rat tissues or cells.
Monoclonal antibodies are those produced by an antibody-
producing cell line consisting of a single group (clone) of
identical B lymphocytes. The single clone that becomes a cell
line is obtained from an individual with multiple myeloma,
21
22
23
     Hybridization Techniques

 24

-FISH is a cytogenetic technique that uses fluorescent
probes that bind to only those parts of the chromosome
with a high degree of sequence complementarity.
-Is used to detect and localize the presence or absence
of specific DNA sequences on chromosomes affixed to
a microscope slide .
-Fluorescence microscopy can be used to find out where
the fluorescent probe is bound to the chromosomes.
25
 26

Definition: the smallest unit of living material that can live
  independently and perform vital functions. It is
  considered the structural & functional unit of all living
  tissues.

The term ‘CELL’ comes from the latin word cella meaning
  the small room
27

     Robert Hooke – first to see and identify cork ―cells.‖
28

                       Prokaryotic Cell

            (in Greek. Pro= before, karyon= nucleus)
     Only in bacteria.
     Smaller in size.
     Have a cell wall
     No nuclear membrane or histones(specific basic

      proteins) bound to their DNA and usually no
      membranous organelles.
29

                        Eukaryotic Cell

             (in Greek eu= good, karyon= nucleus)
     Larger and have a distinct nucleus containing DNA

      & histones surrounded by a nuclear envelope.
     Humans have only eukaryotic cells
30

     Functions: secretion, respiration, absorption,
       reproduction, excretion, sensation, contraction,
       conduction, movements, and growth.

     Size: varies from 4 µm to 150 µm, e.g. small cells as
       lymphocyte (6 µm),

     large cells as ovum (150 µm).
31
32

     Shape: rounded, oval, flat, stellate, polygonal,
       cubical & columnar.

     Structure: two major components:
     1- Cytoplasm.
     2- Nucleus.
33
34
35
36

     Definition: specialized intracellular structures that,
      like body organs, perform specific functions.

     They are divided according to whether they have
      membranes or not into:
37
   A- Membranous Organelles

38

   1- The Cell Membrane (Plasmalemma)

   Definition: a living membrane forming the outermost
     cover of the cytoplasm.

   LM:

   Difficult to be seen because it is very thin (8-10 nm).

   Can be demonstrated when stained with silver (Ag) or
     PAS stains.
39

     EM:
     Two dark (electron-dense) lines separated by a light

       one, i.e. 3 parallel lines, so called „trilamellar
       membrane or “unit membrane”.
     There is a fuzzy layer found on the outer surface
       only, which represents the cell coat or (glycocalyx).
40
41
     Molecular Structure:

42

     It consists of different components: lipids 30 %,
       proteins 60% and CHO 10%.

     1- Lipid component: consists of phospholipids and
       cholesterol.

     a) Phospholipid molecules: arranged into 2 layers
       (lipid bilayer).
43
44

     b) Cholesterol molecules: present mainly at the
       cytoplasmic aspect incorporated with the
       hydrophobic region of phospholipids.

     2- Protein component: present in two forms:
     a) Extrinsic (peripheral) proteins: small molecules

       forming a non-continuous layer outside the lipid
       bilayer; loosely attached to both surfaces of the cell
       membrane.
 45

 b) intrinsic (integral) proteins:
 Small molecules: embedded in the hydrophilic region of the

  lipid bilayer.
 Large globules: extend through the full thickness of the

  lipid bilayer and protrude from both sides (transmembrane
  proteins). They act as channels for water-soluble substances
  to pass through the membrane(trans-membrane
  transport).
46

     3- Carbohydrate (CHO) component: formed of:
     a) Glycoproteins: polysaccharide chains attached to

       protein molecules.
     b) Glycolipids: polysaccharides linked to lipid

       molecules. They form a carbohydrate-rich coat (cell
       coat) on the outer surface of the cell membrane.
     Cell coat (glycocalyx):

47

     • Formed of molecules of glycoproteins &
       glycolipids.

     • Present on the external surface of cell membrane.
     • It includes special molecules (receptors), which

       control the entrance of drugs, hormones, bacteria &
       viruses into the cells.
48
49

     Functions of Cell Membrane:
     It encloses the cell. It is the site that controls the

       exchange of materials between the cell and its
       surroundings by several ways:
   Simple transport:

50

   Passive diffusion: water, ions and dissolved gasses
     enter the cell passively across the membrane
     controlled by a concentration gradient.

   Facilitated diffusion: substances which do not
     dissolve in fat need a carrier, e.g. glucose & amino
     acids use integral membrane proteins to enter the
     cell.
51

     Active transport:
     Against a concentration gradient.
     Needs energy, e.g. Na+/K+ pump.
     Bulk transport: by which the cell can engulf or

       extrude large substances:
52

     a)Endocytosis: This is the active process of the cell
       membrane, by which large molecules and particles
       are taken up by the cell in membrane invaginations
       that close at their necks forming vesicles. Ingestion
       of solid particles is called phagocytosis, while
       ingestion of fluids is called pinocytosis.
 53

 Phagocytosis (cell eating): the process by which the membrane
  can engulf solid particles forming a phagosome, e.g. food,
  bacteria, dead cells & foreign bodies as in white blood cells
  (WBCs). When particles or bacteria bind to the receptors on the
  cell surface, the cell membrane extends pseudopodia that
  encircle them. The distal ends of these pseudopodia fuse forming
  a vacuole containing the ingested particle, which will separate
  from the cell membrane and sink into the cytoplasm as a
  phagosome.
54

     Pinocytosis (cell drinking): the process by which
       the membrane can engulf fluid droplets When liquid
       droplets touch the membrane, invaginations are
       formed and encircle the droplets, their edges then
       fuse forming small pinocytic vesicles that separate
       from the membrane and sink into the cytoplasm
55

     b) Exocytosis: the process by which the cell releases
       its products or extrudes residual bodies The secretory
       vesicles approach the cell membrane; their limiting
       membranes fuse with it, and discharge their contents
       into the extracellular space. The limiting membranes
       of the vesicles will be added to the cell membrane.
56

     Functions of cell coat: They are important in:
     Cell immunity.
     Cell recognition (cell identity).
     Cell adhesion.
     Cell protection.

       
57

  Cell membrane modifications: it forms microvilli
    (increase surface area for absorption as in absorptive cells of
    the small intestine), cilia (move particles above the cell
    membrane in one direction), flagella (form the tails of
    spermatozoa), and stereocilia (non-motile long microvilli).

  6- Conduction of excitation waves in nerve cells and
    muscles.
  2- Mitochondria (Mitos = thread, chondros = granules)

58

  Definition: membranous organelles, containing enzymes
   responsible for cell respiration and energy production.
   They are considered the power-house or the battery of the
   cell.

  Sites: accumulate in the cytoplasm at sites of most activity.
59

     Number: More numerous in highly active cells
     • Varies from few to hundreds according to the

       metabolic activity of the cell, e.g. a liver cell has
       about 1000 mitochondria, while a lymphocyte has
       few.
     • Mitochondria can divide by simple division as they
       have their own genetic apparatus (DNA and RNA).
60

     LM: appear as granules or rods when stained with
       special stains. With iron hematoxylin mitochondria
       appear dark blue. With Janus green mitochondria
       stain green.

     EM: appear as rounded or oval membranous vesicles
       of 0.5-1 µ.m in diameter and 5-10 µm in length,
       surrounded with two unit membranes:
61

     • The outer membrane: is smooth, thicker (7 nm),
       and permeable to small molecules and ions.

     • The inner membrane: is thinner, and less
       permeable (selective). It projects into the cavity
       forming incomplete alternating, shelf-like thin folds
       called cristae.

     • The two membranes are separated by an inter-
       membranous space.
62

     • Mitochondrial Matrix: fills the interior cavity,
       more electron-dense than the surrounding cytoplasm,
       and full of granular materials which are:

     1- Elementary particles: ‘globular structures with
       heads attached to the cristae with slender stalk. They
       contain respiratory enzymes (enzymes of Krebs
       cycle & fatty acids oxidation).
63

     2- Matrix granules: electron-dense granules
       containing phospho-lipoproteins bounded to Ca++ &
       Mg++.

     3- DNA & RNA: so mitochondria have its own
       genome (genetic content).
64
65

      Functions of Mitochondria:
      1- Cell respiration: supply energy for cellular activity as they

        contain enzymes important for oxidative phosphorylation for
        glucose and fatty acids oxidation.
      2- Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production as a store of
        energy, which passes to the cytoplasm. On demand, it splits to
        release energy and converts to ADP, which returns to
        mitochondria.
      3- Their Ca++& Mg++ act as catalysts for enzymatic reactions.
  3- Endoplasmic Reticulum(Endo = in, Rete = net)

66

  Definition:

  • they are membranous cell organelles Formed of
   communicating wide and narrow tubules. They are
   synthesize protein , carbohydrate ,lipid and regulate
   mineral metabolism

  • There are two types: a) Rough b) Smooth
 a) Rough (Granular) Endoplasmic Reticulum (rER):
 Definition: It is formed of communicating flat tubules

 67

  (cisternae) with rough surface .Its surface covered by
  ribosomes its synthesizes protein.
 Position: it extends between nuclear membrane and
  cytoplasm. It is present in great amounts in protein
  forming cells, e.g. plasma cells, fibroblast, chondroblasts,
  osteoblasts and pancreatic cells.
 LM: its sites cause localized or diffuse basophilia in H &
  E stained sections.
68
69

     EM: they are formed of communicating flat tubules called

       cisternae covered by ribosomes and ribophorins receptors
70
   Functions of rough endoplasmic reticulum:

71

   1. The rough endoplasmic reticulum and the attached
     ribosomes form protein

   2. They store the formed protein.

   3. They package the formed protein . The package
     protein travel through the cytoplasm as transfer vesicles
     to fuse with golgi apparatus

   4. they form the protein needed for the formation of
     lysosomal enzymes.
   b) Smooth (non-granular) Endoplasmic Reticulum
    (sER):

72

   Definition: they are membrance organelles, formed of
    narrow anastomosing tubules with smooth wall.

   • Position: it extends between nuclear membrane and
    cytoplasm. It is present in great amounts in cells which
    synthesize lipid & carbohydrate e.g. liver cells &
    endocrine cells.

   • LM: cannot be demonstrated, but when abundant causes
    cytoplasmic acidophilia.
73
74

  •EM: branching and anastomosing tubules with smooth
    membranes (no ribosomes), which anastomose in an irregular
    manner forming a network.

  Functions of smooth endoplasmic reticulum:

  1. Lipid synthesis and storage.

  2. Cholesterol & steroid hormones synthesis as cortisone &
    testosterone

  3. Glycogen storage & breakdown as in liver and muscle
    cells.
75

     4. Drug detoxification: excess drugs are removed as
       in liver cells.

     5. Mineral metabolism: calcium ions (Ca++) release
       (pump) in muscle contraction.

     6. HC1 formation in stomach.
     7. Acts as an intracellular pathway.
     4- Golgi Apparatus

76

     LM:

     Golgi bodies are named after the Italian biologist
       Camillo Golgi.

     They are major membranous organelles, concerned
       with secretion.

     They vary in shape, size & site in different cells
       according to cell activity.
77

  They are well developed in secretory cells.

  In H & E stained sections, it doesn’t appear, but in
    deeply basophilic cytoplasm (as in protein
    synthesizing cells), it can be seen as a pale unstained
    area near the nucleus called “negative Golgi image”,
    e.g. in plasma cells.

  With Silver stain (Ag), it can be demonstrated as a
    network of brown granules & fibrils.
78
79

     Sites:
     Apical: between the nucleus and the secretory pole of

       the cell, e.g. in secretory cells.
     Perinuclear: completely surrounds the nucleus, e.g.

       in nerve cells.
80
 81

EM:

1-It consists of saccules or cisternae called the golgi stacks.
2-Each stack consists of 4- 6 cisternae (flattened,
curved, membrane-bounded, slightly expanded at the ends).
3-The Golgi stack is cup-shaped with a convex
surface and a concave surface:
A. The cis face (forming face; immature face):is convex in
shape and lies near to the rER.
B. The trans face (secretory face; mature face):is concave in
shape.
C. The medial compartment .
82

     EM: appear in the following three forms:
     1- Flat vesicles or golgi saccules: they are formed of

       flat sacs , the sacs are arranged above each other
     2- Transfer or micro vesicles: they are small

       rounded sacs filled with protein.
     3- Secretory or macro vesicles
83
84

   Functions of Golgi Apparatus:
   1- Concentration & accumulation of secretory

     products received from rER to form secretory vesicles
     and enzymes.
   2- Chemical modification of proteins by addition of
     carbohydrate and sulfates (glycosylation, sulfation).
85

     3- Discharge of secretory products as hormones
      and enzymes in secretory vesicles by exocytosis.

     4- Renewal and maintenance of cell membrane
      and providing it with integral proteins.

     5- Formation of secretory vesicles, coated vesicles
      and lysosomes.
86

     Secretory Vesicles (Secretory Granules):
     Secretions are modified in the Golgi saccules,

       condensed and packed into small vesicles that bud off
       the mature face. They move to the cell membrane
       where their walls fuse with it and discharge their
       contents by exocytosis.
Endosome

87

Definition: are system of vesicles and tubules involved in the
endocytotic pathway.
Types:
A-Early endosomes:
Site: at the periphery of the cell as a part in the pathway of
the receptor-mediated endocytosis.
Content: the receptors-ligands complex.
The membrane of the endosomes pumps H+ ions into its
interior lowers the pH of endosomes to less than 6
uncoupling of the receptors and the ligands.
The receptors recycle to the cell membrane and the ligands
move to the late endosomes.
 88

B-Late endosomes:
• Site: deep within the cytoplasm near the Golgi complex.

They receive:

1- the ligands from early endosomes.
2- clathrin- coated vesicles containing lysosomal enzymes from
Golgi complex.
PH: 5.5. (the enzymes become active at the acidic pH of the
late endosome).
• The lysosomal enzymes in the late endosome begin to
degrade the ligands açcompanied by further decrease in the
internal pH which then "mature" to form lysosomes.
     5- Lysosomes

89

     Definition:

     Spherical membranous organelles.

     Concerned with intracytoplasmic digestion.

     Contain hydrolytic enzymes (lipase, protease, acid
       phosphatase, nuclease, etc...).
90

     Origin
     The proteins forming its enzymes are formed in rER,

       transferred to the immature face of Golgi apparatus
       as transfer vesicles, processed in Golgi saccules, till
       they reach the top saccules.
     Arise from the mature surface of Golgi apparatus by
       budding.
91
92

     Number: their numbers vary according to the
       phagocytic activity of the cell, so their numbers are
       more in white blood cells and phagocytic cells.

     LM: they can be demonstrated by histochemical tests
       that detect the enzymes inside them as acid
       phosphatase enzyme
93

     EM:
     Primary lysosomes:
     • They are newly released vesicles from Golgi

       apparatus that have not entered into digestive events.
     • Each is a spherical membranous vesicle, surrounded

       with a single unit membrane.
     • Contain moderately electron-dense homogeneous

       content.
94

  Secondary lysosomes:
  • When a primary lysosome fuses with any

   intracytoplasmic content, which may enter the cytoplasm
   from outside or from inside, it becomes a secondary
   lysosome.
  • They have a heterogeneous appearance in EM because
   of the various materials resulting from digesting.
95

     • Secondary lysosomes are of many types according
       to the type of vesicle that primary lysosome fuses
       with.

     • Types of secondary lysosomes:
     1- Heterolysosomes: when a primary lysosome fuses

       with a phagosome. It fuses with its membrane and
       empties its hydrolytic enzymes into the vacuole to
       digest its content (bacteria, viruses, etc...).
96

     2- Multivesicular bodies: when a primary lysosome
       fuses with a pinocytic vesicle (liquids taken by the
       cells by pinocytosis).

     3- Autolysosomes: when a primary lysosome fuses
       with an autophagic vacuole (vacuole containing old
       or broken down organelles as old mitochondria, i.e.
       endogenous component from inside the cell). The
       process is called autophagy.
97

     4- Residual bodies: after digestion of the contents of
       a secondary lysosome, digested nutrients diffuse back
       to the cytoplasm through lysosomal membrane, while
       indigestible compounds are retained within vesicles
       and called residual bodies.
98
99

     Functions of Lysosomes:
     1- Digest nutrients and solid particles in phagosomes,

       and fluid droplets in pinocytic vesicles.
     2- Defend the body against foreign invaders, as

       bacteria and viruses.
     3- Maintain cell health by elimination of old or

       worn out organelles.
100

     4- Digestion of the whole cell after death: as the
       hydrolytic enzymes escape from the lysosomal
       membrane after cell death to digest and lyse all its
       contents (postmortem autolysis).

     5- Help the sperm to penetrate the ovum
       (fertilization).

     6- In thyroid glands: it breaks the inactive hormone
       into the active form.
101
Peroxisomes (Microbodies)

 102

Peroxisomes are single membrane–bounded organelles
containing oxidative enzymes.
Peroxisomes (microbodies) are small , membrane-limited
spherical organelles that contain oxidative enzymes,
particularly catalase and other peroxidases.
Virtually all oxidative enzymes produce hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2) as a product of the oxidation reaction. Hydrogen
peroxide is a toxic substance. The catalase present in
peroxisomes carefully regulates the cellular hydrogen peroxide
content by breaking down hydrogen peroxide, thus protecting
the cell. In addition, peroxisomes contain D-amino acid
oxidases, -oxidation enzymes, and numerous other enzymes.
Cytoplasmic organells that participate

in process of protein synthesis

 103
104

  Ribosomes
  Definition:
  • Non-membranous rounded or oval bodies (12 x 25

    nm).
  • Formed of strands of rRNA and associated proteins.
  • Formed in the nucleolus and pass to the cytoplasm

    through the pores in the nuclear membrane. Ribosomes
    are the site of protein synthesis.
105

                                                                                                  Ribosome
106

     Number: cells that have high rates of protein
       synthesis have great numbers of ribosomes, and also
       have prominent nucleoli.

     LM: too small to be seen but when abundant they
       cause cytoplasmic basophilia due to their acidic
       content (RNA). Cytoplasmic basophilia may be:
107

     • Diffuse: as in embryonic cells.
     • Localized: as in pancreatic cells (at the base of the

       cell).
     • Spotty: as in nerve cells (Nissl's granules).
108
109
110

     EM: small electron-dense granules, each is formed
       of 2 subunits of unequal size, small & large ones.
       These 2 subunits unite together when the ribosome
       attaches to mRNA. The large subunit contains a
       ribosomal groove in its center which contains the
       polypeptide chain. Ribosomes are found in 3 forms:
111

  1- Free: scattered diffusely & singly.
  2- Polysomes (polyribosomes): linked together by a strand

    of mRNA.
  3- Attached: bind to the outer surface of rER
112

    Function of ribosomes:

    Protein synthesis (the factory that builds proteins).

    Free ribosomes form proteins that build up the
     cytoplasm (for growth &regeneration of organelles), i.e.
     proteins for local use.

    Attached ribosomes form proteins secreted by the cells
     as enzymes and hormones, i.e. proteins for export.
 2- Cytoskeleton

113

• The gel-like consistency of the cytoplasm is due to a
network of filamentous protein structures.

• Its principle components are microtubules and
filaments, together with some proteins to link them to
each other and to cell membrane forming a
framework (microtrabecular lattice).
                     a) Microtubules

114

Definition:
Straight hollow tubular structures.
Have constant diameter (25 nm), but unfixed length.
Rigid but flexible.
Structure:
• Built by the assembly (polymerization) of subunits of
a globular protein called tubulin.
• There are two forms of microtubules:
 115

Dynamic form: with continuous assembly and
disassembly causing rapid reshaping of the cell.
Stable form: another form of microtubules in which
polymerized tubulin form solid stable structures that
form the walls of centrioles and axonemes of cilia &
flagella.
LM: not seen except when present in bundles or if
stained with immunofluorescent technique.
EM: long, thin cylindrical tubes, tiny circles in cross
sections.
116
117

    Functions:
    1- Form the skeleton of the cell, and preserve its
    shape.
    2- Help intracellular transport of
    macromolecules.
    3- Form the mitotic spindle during cell division.
    4- Formation of centrioles, cilia & flagella.
Structures Formed by Stable Microtubules
1) Centrioles

 118

Definition: non-membranous organelles, present near
the nucleus in an area in the cytoplasm called
centrosome.
LM: can be demonstrated with iron hematoxylin stain
as two small dark bodies in the middle of a paler area
in the cytoplasm (centrosome). This area is very rich in
tubulin molecules, from which new microtubules are
formed and is known as Organizing Center Microtubule
(MTOC).
EM:

 119

2 cylindrical structures, oriented at right angles to each
other (0.2 um diameter and 0.5 pm in length).
In cross section, each centriole appears as a hollow
cylinder and its peripheral wall formed of 9 bundles of
microtubules, each bundle is formed of 3 microtubules
(triplets), i.e. the wall of the centriole is formed of 9 X
3 = 27 microtubules. The inner microtubule (A) (near
the center) is a Complete cylinder, made of 13
protofilaments, while B or C microtubules are made of
less than 13, usually 10 sharing the wall of adjacent
one.
120
121

Functions of Centrioles:
1· Play an important role in cell division: the two
centrioles duplicate, each pair of centrioles migrates
to one side of the cell. They are surrounded by an
area rich in tubulin (MTOC) from which the
microtubules of the mitotic spindle are formed.
2- Share in the formation of cilia, flagella.
                         2) Cilia

122

Definition:
Motile hair-like processes from the free surface of
some epithelial cells.
Cilia are formed of microtubules covered by cell
membrane.
Origin: each cilium grows out and remains attached
to a basal body, which is embedded in the cytoplasm.
Basal bodies are identical to centrioles, and are
produced by them through duplication thousands of
times during development.
123

 LM: hair-like striations.
 EM: a cilium is formed of 3 parts: a basal body,
 a shaft and rootlets.
 1- basal body:
 It is formed of a single centriole, which after
 replication from the original centrioles, migrates
 to the surface.
 It is similar in structure to a centriole, i.e. 27
 microtubules in 9 triplets.
 It is embedded in the cytoplasm.
 124

2- Shaft (axoneme):
Finger-like cytoplasmic projection from the surface
membrane.
From each triplet, the inner 2 microtubules (A & B)
grow by polymerization of tubulin dimers from their
plus end → doublets pushing the cell membrane in
front of them. So. the shaft is formed of 9 bundles of
doublets at its periphery in addition to polymerization
of 2 microtubules in the center (2 singlets).
So each shaft is formed of (9 x 2) + 2 = 20
microtubules.
 125

3- Rootlets: develop at the lower end to fix the basal
body and shaft to the underlying cytoplasm.
They are formed by growth of the third outer
microtubule (C) in each triplet in the basal body into
the cytoplasm (i.e. 9 microtubules)
126
 127

Functions of Cilia:
1- Their rhythmic beating helps to move fluids or
particles in one direction over the surface of the
cell. The best example is the cilia in the respiratory
tract that beat upwards and move a film of mucus, on
which foreign particles are stuck, to be expelled out
by coughing or sneezing.
2- Modified cilia act as receptors in sense organs, e.g.
rods & cones in the retina.
    3) Flagella

128

    Definition: They are motile projections from the
    cell, designed to move the cell itself. They have
    exactly the same basic structure as the axoneme
    of the cilium (nine peripheral doublets and 2
    central singlets), but extremely longer. A
    flagellum forms the tail of the spermatozoa,
    which helps its whip-like movements.
                        b) Filaments

129

Definition: A group of minute threads or fine strands
of molecular proteins responsible for elasticity and
contractility of cytoplasm (muscles of the cell). They
differ in size and distribution according to cell types.
Types: According to size, 3 forms are present:
1- Thin filaments: 6 nm, e.g. actin (microfilaments).
2- Intermediate filaments: 10 nm, e.g. keratin, vimentin,
desmin, neuoro-filaments & glial filaments.
3- Thick filaments: 15 nm, e.g. myosin filaments.
(1) Thin filaments (Microfilaments)
(Actin filaments)

 130

Definition: extremely fine strands of molecular actin
(6 nm).

Sites & Functions:
1- Form a band or dense mesh beneath the cell membrane
(peripheral ectoplasm).
2- In skeletal muscles, interact with myosin (thick) filaments for
contraction.
3- Initiate cell membrane mobility and changes in cell shape
(amoeboid movements
pseudopodia, endocytosis) as in WBCS.
4- In microvilli, microfilaments form their core to keep their
shape.
(2) Intermediate filaments

131

Definition: a family of filaments of similar microscopic
structure, but different in chemical nature. They are
intermediate in size between microtubules and
microfilaments (8-11 nm in diameter).
Types: several types, each is formed of protein
molecules characteristic for it:
132

1- Keratin filaments (tonofilaments): found in epithelial
cells and form hairs and nails.
2- Vimentin: found in cells of mesenchymal origin as
most CT cells. Also provide mechanical strength to
muscle cells and nuclear envelope.
3- Desmin: found in muscle cells to join myofibrils
together.
4- Neurofilaments: in neurons to support their long
processes.
5- Glial filaments: in glial cells for support.
   (3) Thick filaments (Myosin filaments)

133

   Their diameter is about 15 nm. Formed of the
   protein myosin and are arranged in bundles.
   Each thick filament is formed of 200-300 myosin
   molecules. They are present in muscle cells and
   interact with actin filaments for muscle
   contraction.
134
     Functions of cytoskeleton:

135

     • It maintains the shape of the cell & its attachment.

     • It holds and moves the organelles, helps the
       migration of the vesicles.

     • It has an important role in cellular movement
       (amoeboid movement).

     • It has an important role in endocytosis, exocytosis
       and cell division
136

     Definition:
     • The largest and most distinct component of the cell.
     • Present in all cells, except RBCs and platelets (not

       true cells).
     • Plays an important role in heredity, cell division and

       controls all cellular functions.
137
138

     Number: usually one nucleus is present in each cell
       (mononucleated), but some cells have two nuclei
       (binucleated) as liver cells and some have more than
       two nuclei (multinucleated) as osteoclasts & skeletal
       muscles.

     Position: usually central, but may be eccentric, basal
       or peripheral. Nucleus is

     always present in the wider part of the cell.
139

     Shape: rounded, flattened, oval, kidney-shaped,
       segmented, lobulated, or

     bilobed (horse shoe).
140
141

     LM:
     • Dark blue with basic stains as hematoxylin,

       methylene blue.
     • Its basophilia is due its content of DNA & RNA.
     Appearance: according to cell activity it may

       appear:
142

     Lightly stained (vesicular): pale with fine extended
       chromatin (open face nucleus) and prominent
       nucleolus, e.g. nerve cells nucleus.

     Deeply stained (condensed): masses of dense
       condensed chromatin granules (closed face nucleus),
       e.g. small lymphocytes.
143

     Structure of the nucleus: 4 components:
     1- Nuclear membrane (Envelope).
     2- Chromatin material.
     3- Nucleolus.
     4- Nuclear sap.
144
145

     Structure of the Nucleus
     Nuclear Membrane (Nuclear Envelope)
     LM: blue line (basophilic) due to chromatin on its

       inner side & ribosomes on its outer side.
  EM:

146

  • Double walled membrane formed of two parallel unit
    membranes separated by a perinuclear space (10-30 nm)
    and interrupted at intervals by nuclear pores.

  - Outer nuclear membrane (facing the cytoplasm): It is
    rough & granular due to ribosomes attached to its outer
    surface, continuous with rER cisternae.
147

     - Inner nuclear membrane (facing the nucleus): It
       is fibrillar due to attached chromatin threads on its
       inner side (peripheral chromatin).

     -Nuclear pores: circular openings at intervals where
       the outer & inner membranes fuse to be continuous
       as diaphragms.
148
149

     Chromatin
     Definition:
     Particles and threads in the interphase nucleus that

       change into chromosomes during cell division.
     It represents the genetic material, formed of

       nucleoproteins (DNA + Histone).

       
150
 LM:

151

 • Basophilic masses or threads.
 • Have two forms according to cell activity:
 1- Euchromation (extended or active):
 - Not visible in LM which makes the nucleus pale in

   staining (vesicular nucleus).
 - It represents extended (uncoiled) chromosomes.

 - Contains the active genes that direct protein synthesis in
   protein-forming cells.
   2- Hetrochromatin (condensed or inactive): Appears

152

     dark in LM (condensednucleus) as it represents coiled
     chromosomes, and contains the inactive genes.

   EM:

   1- Euchromatin: appears as fine granules only at high
     magnifications.

   2-Heterochromatin: appears as masses of
     nucleoproteins condensed at different sites in the
     nucleus
153

     Sites of heterochromatin:
     a) Peripheral chromatin: attached to the inner

       surface of nuclear membrane.
     b) Chromatin islands: aggregated clumps scattered

       in the nuclear sap.
     c) Nucleolus-associated chromatin: condensed

       around the nucleolus.
154

     Functions of Chromatin:
     Carries genetic information.
     Directs & controls protein synthesis.
     Formation of RNA (mRNA, rRNA & tRNA).
155
156

     3- Nucleolus
     LM:
     • Rounded, deeply basophilic mass, as it is rich in

       nucleic acids and surrounded with chromatin.
     • Usually one or two in each nucleus.
  EM: It has dark and light areas.

157

  • The dark area is called (nucleolar organizer) it is
    surrounded with granular and fibrillar parts. The
    Granular part formed of granules of mature
    ribosomal RNA. The fibrillar part is formed of
    filaments of newly formed ribosomal RNA.

  • The light areas: formed of the nucleolar sap.
158

     Functions of the Nucleolus: formation of ribosomal
       RNA & ribosomes, which pass through nuclear pores
       to the cytoplasm and start protein synthesis.

     N.B.: Protein-forming cells have large prominent one
       or more nucleoli.
159

     4- Nuclear Sap
     Definition:
     • A colloidal solution that fills the spaces between

       chromatin material and nucleolus.
     • Formed of: nucleoproteins, enzymes, sugars,

       calcium, potassium & phosphorous ions.
160

     Functions of Nuclear Sap: Provides a medium for
       transport of RNA through nuclear pores to cytoplasm
       for protein synthesis.
161

     Functions of the Nucleus
     1- It carries all the genetic information and hereditary

       factors.
     2- It controls all the cell functions including protein

       synthesis.
     3- It is responsible for the formation of RNA.
     4- It directs cell division.
Dr:Hani Ahmed Alanqar
       Consultant of
     Histopathology

     El shifa hospital

   Epithelial Tissue
• A tissue is a group of cells

– Common embryonic origin

– Function together to carry out specialized
  activities

• Hard (bone), semisolid (fat), or liquid
  (blood)

• Histology is the science that deals with
  the study of tissues.

• Pathologist specialized in laboratory

studies  of  cells and tissue for Copyright 2009, John Wiley &  diagnoses
                                     Sons, Inc.
– Epithelial
    • Covers body surfaces and lines hollow organs,
      body cavities, duct, and forms glands

– Connective
    • Protects, supports, and binds organs.
    • Stores energy as fat, provides immunity

– Muscular
    • Generates the physical force needed to make body
      structures move and generate body heat

– Nervous
    • Detect changes in body and responds by
      generating nerve impulses
• Tissues of the body develop from three primary
  germ layers:

       • Ectoderm, Endoderm, and Mesoderm
   – Epithelial tissues develop from all three germ

      layers
   – All connective tissue and most muscle tissues

      drive from mesoderm
   – Nervous tissue develops from ectoderm
• Epithelial tissue consists of cells arranged in
   continuous sheets, in either single or multiple layers

    – Closely packed and held tightly together
    – Covering and lining of the body
    – Free surface
– protection - skin
– absorption – small intestine
– secretion – glandular epithelium
– excretion – epithelium of kidney tubule
– sensory – neuro-epithelium
– lubrication – goblet cells and sebaceous gland
• Cellularity

     – cells are in close contact with each other with little or no
        intercellular space between them

• Specialized contacts

     – may have junctions for both attachment and communication

• Polarity

     – epithelial tissues always have an apical and basal surface

• Support by connective tissue

     – at the basal surface, both the epithelial tissue and the connective
        tissue contribute to the basement membrane

• Avascular

     – nutrients must diffuse

• Innervated
• Regeneration

     – epithelial tissues have a high capacity for regeneration
• Basement membrane

    – Thin double extracellular layer that serves as the point of
        attachment and support for overlying epithelial tissue

    – Basal lamina

          • Closer to and secreted by the epithelial cells
          • Contains laminin, collagen, glycoproteins, and proteoglycans

    – Reticular lamina

          • Closer to the underlying connective tissue
          • Contains collagen secreted by the connective tissue cells
A. Number of layers :

   1- Simple Epithelium:

    made of one layer only.

   2- Stratified Epithelium :
    made of more than one layer

B. Function into :

  1- Surface (covering or lining).
  2- Glandular
• First name of tissue indicates number of
  layers

   – Simple – one layer of cells

   – Stratified – more than one
      layer of cells
• Last name of tissue describes shape of
  cells

   – Squamous – cells wider
      than tall (plate or “scale” like)

   – Cuboidal – cells are as wide
      as tall, as in cubes

   Columnar – cells are taller than
       they are wide, like columns
• Naming the epithelia includes both the layers (first) and
   the shape of the cells (second)
    – i.e. stratified cuboidal epithelium

• The name may also include any accessory structures
    – Goblet cells
    – Cilia
    – Keratin

• Special epithelial tissues (don’t follow naming
   convention)
    – Psuedostratified
    – Transitional
• Normally classified according to:

    – Arrangement of cells into layers
    – Shapes of cells
• Arrangement of cells in layers

    – Consist of one or more layers depending on function
    – Simple epithelium

          • Single layer of cells that function in diffusion, osmosis,
             filtration, secretion, or absorption

    – Pseudostratified epithelium

          • Appear to have multiple layers because cell nuclei at different
             levels

          • All cells do not reach the apical surface

    – Stratified epithelium

          • Two or more layers of cells that protect underlying tissues in
             areas of wear and tear
Simple squamous epithelium
Simple cuboidal epithelium
Simple columnar epithelium (nonciliated and

  ciliated)
• Description

   – single layer of flat cells with disc-shaped
      nuclei

• Special types

   – Endothelium (inner covering)

         • slick lining of hollow organs

   – Mesothelium (middle covering)

         • Lines peritoneal, pleural, and pericardial cavities
         • Covers visceral organs of those cavities
• Function

   – Passage of materials by passive diffusion and
      filtration

   – Secretes lubricating substances in serosae

• Location

   – Renal corpuscles
   – Alveoli of lungs
   – Lining of heart, blood and lymphatic vessels
   – Lining of ventral body cavity (serosae)
Simple squamous
lining the walls of

   the capillary
• Description

    – single layer of cube-like cells with large, spherical
       central nuclei

• Function

    – secretion and absorption

• Location

    – kidney tubules, secretory
       portions of small glands,
       ovary & thyroid follicles
• Description

   – single layer of column-shaped (rectangular)
      cells with oval nuclei

         • Some bear cilia at their apical surface
         • May contain goblet cells

• Function

   – Absorption; secretion of mucus, enzymes,
      and other substances

   – Ciliated type propels mucus or reproductive
      cells by ciliary action
• Location

   – Non-ciliated form

         • Lines digestive tract,
           gallbladder, ducts of
           some glands

   – Ciliated form

         • Lines small bronchi,
           uterine tubes, uterus
• Description

    – All cells originate at basement membrane
    – Only tall cells reach the apical surface
    – May contain goblet cells and bear cilia
    – Nuclei lie at varying heights within cells

          • Gives false impression of stratification

• Function

    – secretion of mucus; propulsion of mucus by cilia
• Locations

   – Non-ciliated type

         • Ducts of male
           reproductive tubes

         • Ducts of large glands

   – Ciliated variety

         • Lines trachea and most
           of upper respiratory
           tract
• Contain two or more layers of cells
• Regenerate from below
• Major role is protection
• Are named according to the shape of cells

  at apical layer
Stratified squamous epithelium
Stratified cuboidal epithelium
Stratified columunar epithelium
Transitional epithelium
– Several layers of cells that are flat in the apical layer

      • New cells are pushed up toward apical layer
      • As cells move further from the blood supply they dehydrate, harden,

         and die

– Keratinized form contain the fibrous protein keratin

      • Found in superficial layers of the skin

– Nonkeratinized form does not contain keratin

      • Found in mouth and esophagus
– Fairly rare type of epithelium
– Apical layers are cuboidal
– Functions in protection
– Also very uncommon
– Columnar cells in apical layer only
– Basal layers has shorten, irregular shaped cells
– Functions in protection and secretion
– Found only in the urinary system
– Variable appearance
– In relaxed state, cells appear cuboidal
– Upon stretching, cells become flattened and appear

   squamous
– Ideal for hollow structure subjected to expansion
This one type of epithelial tissue specialized to produce
secretion.

   It is classified into

A. Endocrine Glands.
B. Exocrine Glands.

according to the presence or absence of duct
  systems
• These glands are composed of secretory units and
  duct systems.

• classified in different ways.
  According to Number of Cells :

A. Unicellular glands like goblet cells, they are present

in large number in the lining epithelia of large intestine and the
respiratory tract.

B. Multicellular glands which form most of the

     glands of the body example salivary glands.
According to the Mode of Secretion :

A. Merocrine Glands (exocrine part of pancreas) :
where the secretory products leave the cells by exocytosis
with no loss of cellular material.

B. Holocrine Glands (sebaceous glands) :
in which the secretory product is shed with the whole cell,
a process which involves destruction of the secretary cell.

C. Apocrine Glands (Mammary and Axillary's sweat
glands) :
in which the secretory product is discharged with parts of
the apical cytoplasm.
                  Simple

• Simple tubular                       • Simple acinar/alveolar

Large intestine                        Penile urethral gland
                          Sweat gland  Sebaceous gland

  stomach
           Compound gland

• Tubular                   • Acinar/alveola

Brunner’s gland (Duodenum)  Pancreas

                            Submandibular gland
According type of secretion

Serous secreting glands
• Secrete watery secretion

   containing some
   enzymes e.g parotid
   salivary glands
Mucous glands
Secrete viscous
glycoprotein
secretion(mucus) e .g
goblet cells
Muco-serous glands

 • Secrete mucous and
    serous acini e.g
    submandibular and
    sublingual glands

 Waxy glands
 Secrete waxy secretion
 e.g ceruminous glands
 in the external ear
Cellular glands

 • Secrete cells as
    sperms and ova e.g
    testis and ovary
          Neuro-epithelium

• Epithelial cells are modified and
  specialized to receive particular stimuli.

• Epithelial cells act as sensory receptors for
  special sensation.

Sites:
Tongue: taste buds.
Eye: rods and cones in retina (for vision).
Internal ear: for hearing and equilibrium.
            Myoepithelium

• Special type of epithelial cells that are
  modified to contract .

• Branched cells with multiple processes ,
  which contain contractile filaments .

• Located around the basal parts of some
  epithelial secretory cells . They surround
  the glandular acini and help in squeezing
  them to discharge their secretion into the
  ducts , e.g in sweat , salivary and
  mammary glands ..
• Microvilli
• Stereocilia
• Cilia & Flagella
– irregular, fingerlike projections with an
  extracellular glycoprotein layer (cell coat).

  Can be seen under LM

  Contain a core of Actin filaments
– long, non-motile microvilli

    • epididymis and ductus deferens
• Cilia

• Cilia are elongated, highly motile structures on the
   surface of some epithelial cells, which is much longer
   and two times wider than a typical microvillus.

• A ciliated cell of the trachea lining is estimated to have
   about 250 cilia

• Flagella

• present in the human body only in spermatozoa are
   similar in structure to cilia but are much longer and are
   normally limited to one flagellum per cell
. Inset: Cilia seen in cross section clearly show the 9 + 2 array of

the axoneme microtubules in each cilium
Lateral specialization & intercellular
junctions

1.cellular interdigitation: increase the surface area for
transport e.g. cells of intestine and kidney tubules

2.intercellular junctions: link the neighboring cells
together by cell adhesion molecules
Types of cell junctions
1.Cell to cell adhesions
2.Cell to matrix adhesions

The cell adhesion is adynamic e.g
Non adhesive cell become adhesive
Adhesive cells become non adhesive
Cell adhesion molecules (CAM)

• Definition: transmembrane glycoproteins, consists of
three parts (domains):
1- Extracellular part: binds with the other CAMS of
adjacent cells or extracellular matrix proteins.
2- Intramembranous (transmembrane)part.
3- Cytoplasmic part: attached to cytoskeleton of the cell
through linker proteins.
CAMS may be calcium-dependent, affected by the
extracellular ca ions concentration while others are
calcium- independent.
        Cell to cell junction

I-Tight junction(occluding
junction, Zonula occludens)
Site: at the apical of the cells.
Function: restrict the passage of
molecules between epithelium
(barrier) e.g. epithelial cells of
intestine
• Structure:

A- The outer leaflets of

adjacent cell membranes are

fused together, forming a belt-

like junction.

B- 2 transmembrane proteins

(occluding and claudin ) join

together to seal (occlude) the

intercellular space          no

intercellular space between

the adjacent cells.
II-Anchoring junctions

Site: in cells that are subjected to severe
mechanical stress e.g. cardiac muscles and
epidermis of skin.
Function: provide strong attachment and act as a
link between the cytoskeleton of adjacent cells.
• Histological structure: 2 types:
•Zonula adherens :
1- Belt-like specialization that encircles the apical part of
the 2 adjoining cells.
2- The intercellular space between the adjacent cell
membranes is 20 nm ( the usual intercellular space).
3- Cadherins adhere the two cells together ( ca-
dependant).
4- The cytoplasmic part of cadherins are attached to
actin filaments inside the cells.
Removal of Ca leads to disruption of the junction.
Macula adherens (desmosomes) :
1-A spot-like specialization of the cell membrane
2-Two plaques located opposite each other on the
cytoplasmic aspects of the adjacent cell membranes, to
which cytokeratin filaments are inserted.
3-Cadherins connect the two cells together (Ca
dependent)
4- the intercellular space between the opposing cell
membranes is 30 nm.
5-Dense vertical filamentous material is present in the
intercellular space thạt represents the extracellular
domains of cadherins.
In the presence of a calcium chelating agent, the
desmosome breaks into 2 halves and the cells separate
Inter cellular junction complex:
in several epithelia the zonula occludens ,
the zonula adherens and macula adherens
are present in a definite order from the apex
toward the base of cell
lII-Communicating junction (gap junction, nexus)
Sites: in epithelial cells, cardiac and smooth muscle
cells.
Function:
They permit the exchange of molecules e.g. ions, amino
acids allowing passage of signals involved in contraction
and communication from one cell to another.
• Histological structure:
1-A spot-like junction, formed of protein channels.
2- The channel is called connexons which are formed
of 6 transmembrane proteins called connexins.
3-When two connexons of opposing cell membranes
are in register, they form a channel connecting the
cytoplasm of adjacent cells.
4- The intercellular space is 3nm.
Hemidesmosomes

•Definition: half of desmosome but are different
functionally and in their content.
• Site: at the base of the epithelial cells to connect them
with the basement membrane.
Structure: The CAMS are integrins, their extracellular
parts bind to proteins of the basal lamina while the
intracellular parts bind to keratin filaments.
Dr/hani ahmed alanqar
consultant of pathology

Connective Tissue
Origin:

• Mesoderm , Mesenchymal Tissue [undifferentiated
 mesenchymal cells (UMCs) + Matrix].
Characteristics:

 1- It is mesodermal in origin.
 2- It is formed of widely separated cells with large

   amount of ground intercellular substances (matrix).
Characteristics:

3- It is penetrated by blood vessels, lymphatics and
 nerves.

4- It connects, supports and protects other tissues &
 organs.
Functions

• 1)Structural support
• C.T. serve several functions, of which the most

 prominent function is structural support to enable
 maintenance of anatomical form of organs and
 organ systems.
• -Examples include the C.T. capsules surrounding
 organs (such as the kidney, lymph nodes).

• loose C.T. acts to fill the spaces between organs.
• Tendons (connecting muscles to bone) and the elastic
 ligaments (connecting bones to bones) are examples
 of specialized orderly forms of C.T..

• -Skeletal tissues (cartilage and bone) are special forms
 of C.T.
• 2)Metabolic functions
• -C.T. serve a nutritive role.
• -All the metabolites from the blood pass from

 capillary beds and diffuse through the adjacent C.T.
 to cells and tissues.
• -Similarly waste metabolites from the cells and
 tissues diffuse through the loose C.T. before
 returning to the blood capillaries.
• -Adipose tissue (especially that of the hypodermis)
 serves as an energy store and also provides
 thermal insulation. Surplus calories can be
 converted into lipid and stored in adipocytes.
• 3) Blood components and blood vessels
• -Hematopoietic tissues (blood-forming tissues) are

 a further specialized form of C.T..
• -These include the myeloid tissue (bone marrow) and
 the lymphoid (lymphatic) tissue.

• -The lining of the blood and lymphatic vessels
 (endothelial cells) as well as the peripheral blood, are
 also specialized forms of C.T.
• 4 ) Defensive functions

• -Various components of the C.T. play roles in the
 defense or protection of the body including many of
 the components of the vascular and immune systems
 (plasma cells, lymphocytes, neutrophils, eosinophils,
 basophils, mast cells).
• The various macrophages of the body are also
 categorized as C.T. cells. These all develop from
 monocytes and are grouped as part of the
 Mononuclear Phagocyte System of the body.
• -Macrophages are important in tissue repair as well as
 defense against bacterial invasion.

• -The fibroblasts of C.T. proliferate in response to injury
 of organs and migrate to and deposit abundant new
 collagen fibers, resulting in the formation of fibrous
 scar tissue.
Components

  • C.T. consists of 3 main components:
  1- Cells
  2- Fibers
  3- Matrix
  A- soft..........................C.T. proper
  B- Fixed rubbery..........cartilage
  C- solid……………… bone
  D-fluid………………. blood
• The C.T. fibers are formed of protein molecules that
 polymerize to form thin threads.

• There are three types of C.T. fibers:
• 1- White Collagenous fibers.
• 2- Yellow Elastic fibers.
• 3- Reticular fibers.
1- White Collagenous Fibers:

   • Structure:
   They are formed by aggregation of tropocollagen

     molecules secreted mainly by fibroblasts and other
     cells as chondroblasts, osteoblasts and
     odontoblasts.
• N.B.: collagen protein is the most abundant protein in
 the human body.

• L.M
• • In histological preparations, they appear as wavy

 branching bundles, formed of non-branching fibers.
• They are colorless when single, white when condensed, so they
  are called white fibers, e.g. in tendons &aponeuroses.

• Fibers are parallel to each other in the bundles.

• They are acidophilic in staining.

-H&E                  pink.

- Mallory's stain     blue.

- Van Gieson's stain  red.
Characters:
• They are soft, strong, flexible but not elastic.
• Collagen protein can be digested by pepsin &trypsin

 enzymes, and is affected by boiling (transforming into
 gelatin), acids and alkalies(stanning).
• Functions:
give strength and rigidity to tissues, and resist pulling

 forces.
2 - Yellow Elastic Fibers:

Shape:
• They are formed of thin, long, branching fibers.
• Fibers are stretchable and yellow in color in fresh

 state.
• They run singly not in bundles, but branch and

 anastomose to form networks.
• Structure:
• Elastic fiber formed of a core of elastin protein

 synthesized in
• fibroblasts, surrounded with a sheath of microfibirils

 of a glycoprotein called fibrillin.
• Characters:
• Resistant to boiling & chemicals, resist digestion by

 enzymes as
• usual proteases, but can be digested by pancreatic

 elastase.
• Staining:

•H&E                  pink.

• Orcein stain        brown.

• Van Gieson's stain  yellow.

• Functions:

• They provide the tissue with the power of stretch and
  elasticity.
3 - Reticular Fibers:

 • Shape:
 • They are formed of delicate (very thin) fibers that

   branch & anastomose to form network or
   reticulum.
• Structure:

• They are formed of a thin type of collagen (type III).

• Staining:

• Silver stain    brown to black
 (argyrophilic).
• Functions:
• Form the stroma of organs (the background).
Definition:

• It is the inter-cellular substance in which cells &
 fibers are embedded. It is amorphous, jelly like, and
 translucent.
Structure:

 • it is formed of a viscid substance which has a
   complex mixture of:

 • 1- Proteoglycans (glycosaminoglucans, GAGs):
 • 2- Glycoproteins:
 • 3- Tissue fluid: salvation water surrounding these

   structures, similar to plasma.
Staining:

• - Ground substance can be stained
 metachromatically with basic stains as toluidine
 blue giving purple color.

• - PAS     red color

• - Silver  brown color.
Functions:

• 1 - Through its aqueous phase all nutrients & gasses
 and wastes pass between blood and cells.

• 2- Cells & fibers are bounded.
• 3- It acts as a physical barrier for spread of bacteria

 and microorganisms.
• The fixed cells are the intrinsic component of the
 C.T., they are the stable

population of long lived cells.
They are produced in the C.T. & remain in it.
• The free cells changeable population, they are motile
 cells, belonging

to the immune system, entering the C.T. from the
 blood, and wander through it.

They are short lived, and continuously replaced from
 the blood.
A- Fixed C.T. Cells
1- Undifferentiated Mesenchymal
Cells (UMCs):

• Sites:

• Unspecialized stem cells present in the embryo.

• They have the ability to differentiate into other types
  of C.T. cells (mother cells).
• In adult, they remain undifferentiated in certain
 areas to act as a life-longsource for some cells e.g.:

- in bone marrow —≫blood cells.
- around blood vessels —≫pericytes.
• Small, irregular, branched star (stellate) shaped
 cells.

• Pale basophilic cytoplasm.
• Central large oval nucleus with visible nucleoli.
• EM: few organelles, many ribosomes & fine
 chromatin in the nucleus.

• Functions:
1- Can differentiate into other types of C.T. cells.
2- In bone marrow, it gives blood cells.
2- Pericytes:

  Sites:
  • Present around blood capillaries.
  • They are considered UMCs of the adults.
  LM:
  • branched, with oval nucleus & pale
  cytoplasm.
Functions:
1- The same functions of UMCs but after birth.
2- After birth they give rise to fibroblasts & smooth

 muscles (duringhealing).
3- Their contraction leads to vaso-constriction.
3 - Endothelial Cells:

Sites:
• Lining all blood vessels & heart.
LM:
• Thin flat squamous epithelium with flat
nucleus, little cytoplasm & few organelles
around the nucleus.
Functions:
1- Can divide to produce new endothelial cellsin injury.
2- Can produce their own basement membrane.
3- Can produce antithrombotic factors, which prevent

 platelet aggregation.
4- Can produce collagen (type 4).
4 - Fibroblasts:

Origin:
• UMCs &Pericytes.
Sites:
• The most common type; found nearly in all types

 of C.T. proper.
LM:

• Flat, elongated, branched cells, with thin processes,
 (fusiform in side view).

• Large, pale, oval nucleus & prominent nucleolus.

• Deeply basophilic cytoplasm.
EM:
• Euchromatic nucleus & large nucleolus.
• Large amount of rER& free ribosomes.
• Well developed Golgi apparatus.
• Mitochondria.
N.B.: these are the EM picture of cells active in protein

  synthesis. EM picture of fibroblast
Functions:
1) Formation of C.T. fibers by secretion of their proteins

  (procollagen and elastin, that form collagenous, elastic &
  reticular fibers).
2) Secretion of the ground substances of the matrix, i.e. the
  cells that build the C.T.
3) Healing & repair of C.T. after injury.
N.B: Fibrocytes:
• They are old inactive fibroblasts.
• They are smaller, spindle shaped with fewer processes.
• Less basophilic cytoplasm with darker nuclei.
• Smaller amount of rER.
Functions of fibrocytes:
Continuous slow turnover of extracellular components, for

  maintenance of C.T.
5- Fat Cells (Adipocytes):

Origin: UMC  Lipoblast:

• Unilocular adipocyte (white fat cells)

• Multilocular adipocyte (brown fat cells)
• A- Unilocular fat cell:
Sites: most abundant in white adipose C.T.
LM:
• Rounded or oval, large (120 um) cells.
• Nucleus is peripheral & flattened.
• Cytoplasm is reduced into a very thin film around a large

  fat globule.
• In H & E —>fat dissolves, so cells appear as large
 vacuoles (signet-ring appearance).

• In frozen sections, it stains orange with Sudan III.
EM:
fat droplets appear as electron-dense (black) inclusion

 that occupies most of cytoplasm.
• Functions:
• 1- Storage of fat.
• 2- Support some organs e.g. kidney.
• 3- Heat insulator.
• N.B.: fat cells do not divide, but have a long life

 span.
B- Multilocular fat cell:
Sites: present in brown adipose C.T.
LM: small rounded cells with central rounded nucleus and

  many small fat droplets. They have many mitochondria, so
  appear brown due to the cytochrome pigments present in
  the mitochondria.
Functions: heat generation.
6 - Fixed Macrophages (Histiocytes):

   Origin: from mesenchyme derived monocytes (a
     type of white blood cells).

   They are described as fixed or resident when they
     are attached to fibers.

   Sites: scattered in the C.T. along the collagen fibers.
LM:

• Large branched cell with irregular cell boundary
 pseudopodia), so they have variable shapes, may be
 fusiform or stellate.

• It has darkly stained, small, oval or kidney shaped nucleus.
• Its cytoplasm is acidophilic, granular and vacuolated.
• Can be demonstrated with vital stains as trypan blue or

 Indian ink, where the stain granules are phagocytosed by
 the cells.
EM:
• The surface of macrophage is irregular due to

 pseudopodia, surface folds and microvilli.
• The cytoplasm contains large particles that these cells

 have phagocytosed.
•Lysosmes, primary & different types of secondary
 lysosomes, which attack and degrade the ingested
 materials, also residual bodies that contain
 indigestible remains.
• Few cisterns of rER, prominent Golgi (from which
 arise the lysosomes).

• In certain conditions macrophages fuse and form
 large multinucleated cells called foreign body giant
 cells that are able to phagocytose large foreign
 materials.
• N.B.: Giant cells are common in tuberculosis, and in
 chronic nodular lesions called granulomas.
Functions:
1. Phagocytic cell (engulf & digest micro-organisms).
2. Clean wounds from any dead cells (debris).
3. Interaction with lymphocytes & neutrophils by

 producing interleukins which stimulate attraction of
 neutrophils and mitosis of lymphocytes.
• 4. Act as antigen presenting cells; they can trap,
 transport & partially digest antigens to present them
 to lymphocytes.

• 5.Histiocytes can fuse with each other to form large
 multinucleated cell(Foreign Body Giant cell) to engulf
 large foreign bodies.

• 6.Destruction of old RBCs in liver & spleen.
7 - Reticular Cells:

 Site: in stroma of different organs.
 LM: small stellate shaped branched cells with long
 processes. They form a reticulum together with
 reticular fibers which stain with silver stain.
Functions:
1.Supportive function.
2.Can act as phagocytic cells on need, i.e. when

    stimulated with an antigen.
3.Can differentiate into blood cells in bone marrow.
B- Free C.T. Cells
8 - Plasma Cells

Origin: from further differentiation of B-
               lymphocytes

(B-lymphocyte plasmablast  plasma cell).

Sites: abundant in lymphoid tissue.
LM:
• Oval cell with rounded eccentric nucleus & a clear nucleolus.
• The nucleus has a cart-wheel or clock-face appearance due to

  regular radiating chromatin masses under the nuclear
  membrane.
• The cytoplasm is deeply basophilic with a pale(unstained area)
  “negative Golgi image” near the nucleus.
EM:
Features of cells active in protein synthesis:
• Well developed Golgi apparatus.
• Closely spaced numerous cisternae of rER filling the cytoplasm.
• Mitochondria.
Functions:
formation& secretion of antibodies.
9 - Mast Cells:

 Origin: UMCs in bone marrow.
 Sites:
 • In loose C.T. around blood vessels.
 • Under epithelium of respiratory & digestive tracts.
LM:
•Oval cells with eccentric nuclei.
•Cytoplasm is full of basophilic granules which stain

 metachromatically with basic stains (e.g. toluidine
 blue), so they stain purple or red instead of blue.
EM: Features of secretory cells:
• Well developed Golgi.
• Mitochondria, rER.
•Electron-dense membrane-bounded granules filling

 the cytoplasm.
• Functions:
• 1- Secretion of histamine which causes vasodilation

 that initiates allergic reactions.
• 2- Secretion of heparin (anticoagulant) which

 prevents blood clotting.
• 3- Secretion of eosinophil chemotactic factor, which

 attracts eosinophils to site of allergy.
10 - Free Macrophages:

   • Origin: Arise from blood monocytes, which
     circulate in the blood stream

   • then migrate to the loose C.T. where they undergo
     direct transformation into macrophages. They are
     described free as they are wandering in the C.T.
• LM: They have the same features of fixed
 macrophages as they are the same cell, but at
 different sites.

• Functions: They have the same function as fixed
 macrophages.
11 - Blood Leukocytes:

Origin:
• All blood leukocytes migrate from blood stream to

 C.T. to perform their defensive functions
 (wandering cells) (see blood for their structures
 &functions).
12 - Pigment Cells (Melanophores):

   Origin: C.T. macrophages which phagocytose melanin
     pigments produced in melanocytes.

   Sites: C.T. dermis of skin & eye.
   LM:
   Small branched cells with small dark nuclei,

     cytoplasm is granular.
EM:
Cytoplasm is full of melanin granules(melanosomes).
Functions:
1- Carry melanin pigments which gives the color of the skin
2- Absorb ultraviolet rays and protect the skin from the injurious

  effect of the sun
• According to the relative abundance of the basic
 components of C.T. (cells, fibers & matrix) C.T. is
 classified into two classes:
Loose:

1)Loose alveolar CT
2)Adipose CT
3)Reticular CT
4)Mucoid CT

Dense:

1)White fibrous CT
2)Yellow elastic CT
A- Loose Types of
Connective Tissue

      Proper
1- Loose (Areolar) Connective Tissue:

 • It is the typical and the most common type of C.T.
   proper.

 • Structure:
 • Cells: It contains all types of C.T. cells (most

   common cells are fibroblasts, macrophages, fat
   cells and mast cells).
• Fibers: All types, white collagenous is the most
 common.

• Matrix: most abundant matrix.
Characters:
• It is a loose type that contains potential cavities

 (areolae) which can accommodate large amounts of
 fluids or gasses.
• Delicate consistency, flexible, well vascularized &
 nonresistant to stress.
Sites:
Found everywhere in the body (except the brain):
• Packing and filling the spaces between cells & fibers

 and organs, e.g. subcutaneous tissue (dermis of skin) .
• Submucosa, serous membranes.
• Around blood vessels & nerves along their course.
Functions:
1- Exchange of nutrients to & from blood vessels.
2- It binds structures together.
3- It limits the spread of infection.
2- Adipose Connective Tissue:

 • Similar to areolar C.T. but fat cells predominate over
   other components.

 • Structure:
 • Cells: It is formed of a large number of fat cells, closely

   packed few fibroblasts, Mast cells & lymphocytes are
   scattered in the narrow spaces between fat cells.
• Fibers: reticular fibers form a network around the fat
 cells, Collagen and elastic fibers are present in
 between the lobules of fat cells.

• Types of adipose tissue:
There are two types according to vascularity &

 functions:
• a) White adipose connective tissue:
• Sites:
• Widely distributed in the body.
• Under the skin especially in females, e.g. mammary

 gland, gluteal region, abdominal wall & mesentery.
• Around the kidney & blood vessels.
• Characters:
• • Fat cells are large (up to 150 um), filled with one

 globule of nonpigmented yellowish fat.
• • It is poor in blood supply and is affected by diet &

 hormones.
• Functions:
1- Storage of fat.
2- Heat insulation.
3- Support the kidney and other organs.
4- Gives the skin its shape and contour,
• b) Brown adipose connective tissue:
• Sites:

• present in limited areas: interscapular region,
 mediastinal region & axillary region in embryo and
 newborn & is gradually replaced by white fat.
• Character:
• Fat cells are small in size with central nucleus, filled

 with multiple small droplets of pigmented fat.
• Its brown color is due to cytochrome pigments in

 mitochondria &high vascularity. It is not affected by
 starvation.
• Functions:
• Heat generation in newly born infants.
• Release of heat on exposure to cold to warm the

 body.
3- Reticular Connective Tissue:

  • Delicate type.
  • Structure:
  • Cells: primitive fibroblasts, called reticular cells. They

    are stellate with long processes which are joined with
    cell junctions.
  • Fibers: fine network of branching reticular fibers,
    forming) network with the cells.
• Sites:

• It forms the framework (stroma) for cellular solid organs
  (to support the functioning cells, e.g. lymphatic organs
  (spleen & lymph node), kidney, liver, bone marrow, lung
  and all endocrine glands.

• Staining:

• Silver stain (Ag)  brown black.
4- Mucoid Connective Tissue:

 • It is an embryonic, jelly-like C.T., in which the ground
   substance predominates.

 • Structure:
 • Cells: mesenchymal cells or young fibroblasts which are

   stellate, branched with multiple connected processes.
 • Fibers: very fine collagen and reticular fibers.
• Matrix: large amount of soft, jelly-like ground
 substance, rich in mucus and

hyaluronic acid.
• Sites:
• Umbilical cord, where it forms the main component

 and is called Wharton’s Jelly.
B- Dense Types of
Connective Tissue

      Proper
5- White Fibrous Connective Tissue:

• Very dense due to great predominance of collagen
 fibers with few cells.

• Structure:
• Fibers: packed collagen fibers in bundles.
•Matrix: minimal amount (poor in blood supply).
•Cells: fibroblasts (tendon cells). Fibroblasts are enclosed
  between the packed collagen fibers.

• Characters:
• appears white in fresh state, less flexible & more resistant.
• Types:
• according to the arrangement of bundles of collagen

  fibers, there are two types:
• a) Regular white fibrous connective tissue:

• The bundles of collagen are arranged regularly &
 parallel. Fibroblasts are arranged in rows in between
 the collagen bundles (tendon cells), with very little
 amount of matrix.
• Sites:
• Tendons of skeletal muscles.
• Cornea: under the epithelium.
• Function: to withstand stretch in one direction.
• b) Irregular white fibrous connective tissue:
• The bundles of collagen fibers are interwoven & irregularly

  arranged.
• Sites:
• Dermis of the skin.
• Capsule of organs & ligaments.
• Periosteum&perichonderium.
• Sclera of the eye.
• Function:to withstand stretch in different directions.
6- Yellow Elastic Connective Tissue:

 • Dense type, with great predominance of elastic fibers,
   so it appears yellow in fresh state.

 • Structure:
 •Fibers: regular parallel elastic fibers.
 • Cells: few fibtroblasts & fibrocytes.
• Sites:
• Aorta & large arteries.
• Bronchi, bronchioles & around alveoli.
• Ligaments (e.g. ligamentum flavum: joining the vertebrae,

  ligamentum nuchae: at the back of the neck especially
  animals & suspensory ligaments of the penis).
• Vocal cords.
• Staining:

• Orcein stain  brown black.

• Function:

• It forms elastic membranes.

• It has a great elastic power (recoil when stretched, i.e.
 rubber like).
General histology

                 Blood

                                  DR-Hani Ahmed
                                       Alanqar

                                   Consultant of
                                     pathology
Blood is a viscous fluid which flows inside blood vessels,
and is continuously circulating throughout every tissue by
the pumping action of the heart.

• It is considered a type of C.T. as it is formed inside the
bone marrow from mesenchymal tissue, and its cellular
elements on entering the blood stream become suspended in
considerable amount of intercellular liquid
substance(plasma).
Volume: about 3-5 liters in an adult which
constitutes about 5-7% of the body weight.

Color: a thick drop appears red (due to
overlapping of RBCs), while a thin film appears
greenish yellow.
is composed of formed elements suspended in a
liquid phase called the plasma.
1- Formed elements (45%):
• Red Blood Corpuscles (RBCs) or Erythrocytes.
• White Blood Cells (WBCs) or Leukocytes.
• Blood Platelets.
2- Plasma (55%): which is formed of 90% water, 7%
plasma proteins (albumin, globulin and fibrinogen), 2%
organic substances as amino acids, glucose, lipids,
hormones, enzymes & nitrogenous compounds and 1%
inorganic salts.

N.B.: The fluid component of the blood leaves the small
vessels and enters the C.T. as tissue fluid
For histological examination of the blood cells, a
drop of blood is smeared on a glass slide, air
dried, this is called blood film.

The blood film is then stained with a mixture of
acidic and basic stains(neutral stain).
The most common stain used in routine work is
Leishman's stain, which is formed of a mixture of red
acidic stain eosin and blue basic stain methylene blue
dissolved in methyl alcohol (for fixation and
preservation of the cells).

RBCs are acidophilic due to hemoglobin which is a
basic protein,
While leukocytes nuclei are basophilic, their
cytoplasm differs in staining according to the type.

As the number of RBCs (5 million/mm3 ) is by far
larger than leukocytes (4-11 thousands/mm3), with
ratio (1:500), so in blood film, the RBCs look like a
red sea in which blue dots are scattered.
1- Transport as blood carries O2, nutritive materials,
hormones and enzymes to different tissues and cells and it
removes C02 and waste products from them.

2- Protection of the body from bacteria, foreign bodies,
antigens and viruses.

3- Control of body temperature and acid-base balance.
Minute corpuscles that give the blood its red
color.

They develop in the bone marrow as true cells,
but before entering the blood stream they extrude
their nuclei and their organelles are also lost.
They are reduced to be a bag or corpuscle, bounded by
a plasma membrane and contain a colored iron binding
protein called hemoglobin.

This transformation helps the RBCs to perform their
specialized function of transporting O2 from the lungs to
the tissues, and CO2 from tissues to lungs.
Shape:

LM:

In surface view: they appear rounded, non-nucleated,
acidophilic with pale centers and dark periphery, uniform
in size having a diameter of about 6-9 µm (average diameter
7.5 µm).

In side view: they are biconcave, thick at periphery, thin at
the center.
This shape provides the cell with larger surface area
relative to its volume , thus increasing its capacity
for gas exchange.

N.B.: RBCs may be seen adhering one above the
other, stacked in columns resembling piles of coins
(Rouleaux appearance).
EM:

RBCs are nothing but membranous bags that carry hemoglobin
(Hb).

The only cell organelle is the cell membrane (plasma membrane).

They have no nuclei, no organelles, so they are not true cells.

The only cell inclusion is Hb, which appears as an electron-dense
mass filling the whole corpuscle due to its iron content, in
addition to some enzymes as carbonic anhydrase, reductase and
enzymes of glycolysis.
Size of RBCs:
RBCs have a uniform diameter of 6-9 µm. The average
diameter of RBCs is7.5 µm .
Their thickness is 2 µm at the periphery & 1.1 µm or
less at the center.
Life Span of RBCs:
RBCs live about 120 day (4 months), ±7 days.
 Senile RBCs are destroyed in liver & spleen by
phagocytic cells.
 Their iron is stored and recirculates while the pigments
are excreted as bile pigments.
Color of RBCs:
The color of RBCs is due to their Hb content.
A fresh single RBC appears greenish yellow, with a pale central
area.
A drop of blood appears red (due to overlapping of RBCs).
RBCs are acidophilic in staining as Hb is a basic protein..
Number of RBCs:

The average number is 5 millions/mm3.

The normal number of RBCs in adult males is 4.5-5.5
millions/mm3 of blood.

This number is less by 1/2million in adult females to
be 4-5 millions/mm3 .This decrease is due to the
monthly loss of blood in menstruation & the effect of
female hormones.
Abnormalities in number:
A- Polycythemia:
It is the increase in number of RBCs to more than 6
million/mm3.
Causes of polycythemia:
Physiological:
1- Hemoconcentration: due to decreased plasma volume
(vomiting &diarrhea).
2- Excessive production of RBCs due to physiological
hypoxia as: in high altitudes, after muscular exercises
and in newly born infants.

Pathological: Chronic heart and lung diseases that
cause pathological hypoxia, which in turn stimulates the
bone marrow to produce new RBCs.
B- Oligocythemia (anemia):
- It is the decrease in number of RBCs to less than 4
million/mm3.
Causes of anemia:
1-Deficiency anemia: due to deficiency of substances
essential for erythropoiesis as iron, vitamin B12, or
proteins in diet.
2-Hemolytic anemia: results from hemolysis, which is
the destruction of RBCs due to abnormal shape or
content caused by congenital diseases as spherocytosis
and favism (glucose-6-phosphatedehydrogenase
deficiency).

3-Hemorrhagic anemia: due to acute or chronic blood
loss as repeated bleeding from any cause (e.g. excessive
menstrual bleeding, bleeding piles, bleeding nose).
4 -Aplastic anemia: due to damage of bone marrow
resulting from exposure to x-ray irradiation or
prolonged use of antibiotics.
Functions of RBCs:

1- Transport oxygen from blood to the tissues. Hb
combines rapidly with O2 in the lung to form
oxyhemoglobin, which is a reversible compound that
carries O2 inside RBCs to the tissues, where it is
released easily.
2- Remove carbon dioxide from tissues to the lungs. Hb combines

with CO2from the tissues to form carbaminohemoglobin, which
is also a reversible compound, which releases CO2 in the lung.
Adaptation of RBCs to Function:
1- Cell membrane structure:
It is plastic and flexible, so RBCs can change their
shape and squeeze themselves in narrow capillaries.
It is also a lipoprotein, which is highly selective to help
gas exchange.
2- Shape:
Their biconcave shape increases the surface area
exposed for gas exchange.
The rounded edges help their easy passage in small
branched vessels.
3- Content:

RBCs contain no nuclei or organelles, leaving more
space for Hb.

They also contain carbonic anhydrase enzyme needed
for carriage of CO2,and Hb reductase which helps Hb to
combine with O2rapidly.
Differences between RBCs & leukocytes
General Characters:
Color: white when condensed, but in the fresh state
they are colorless.
Size: different sizes, 6-20 µm.
Shape: spherical in blood stream, irregular in C.T.
(highly mobile with different shapes due to their
amoeboid movement).
Content (True cells): They contain nuclei, organelles
& inclusions. They have no Hb, but they have different
granules.

Origin: from myeloid tissue (bone marrow), but some
differentiate in the lymphatic tissue.

Osmotic fragility: they are more resistant to changes
in osmotic pressure than RBCs.
Life span: different according to the type, varying from
few days up to years.

Number: the total number of leukocytes in normal
adult is 4000-11000/mm3
Abnormal number:

Leukocytosis:

the increase in number of WBCs above the upper
limit(11000/mm3). It may be:

Physiological: in infants, during pregnancy, labor & lactation,
after meals, cold bath, muscular exercises and exposure to sun.

Pathological: due to infections especially acute pyogenic
infections (accompanied with pus formation) and chronic
infections.
Leukopenia: the decrease in number below the lower range
(4000/mm3),it occurs in:
- Bleeding.
- Starvation.
- X ray irradiation.
- Excessive use of some antibiotics (e.g. chloramphenicol).
- Typhoid fever and some influenza viruses.
Functions:

The main function of WBCs is protection. WBCs are the main
line of body defense against foreign invaders. Their defensive
functions are performed by:

Non-specific defense mechanism.... phagocytosis.

Specific mechanism  immune response.

WBCs functions are performed outside the blood stream, in the
C.T., in association with other C.T. cells as mast cells.
Types:
There are five types of leukocytes, classified according to:
1) Presence or absence of granules in their cytoplasm into:
granular & non granular.
2) The staining characteristics of these granules.
3) The shape & lobulation of their nuclei.
Leukocytic count:
- Total leukocytic count : is the total number of
leukocytes/mm3 of blood.
- It is done by the hemocytometer, using a special
pipette .
- Differential leukocytic count : is the percentage of
each type of leukocyte to the total number of
leukocytes.

- It is done by preparing a blood film, stained with
Leishman’s stain ,counting each type in each 100
leukocytes counted and calculating its percentage.
I/ Granular Leukocytes (Granulocytes)
Common characters of granular leukocytes:
Have specific stainable granules, and according to the
staining of these granules granulocytes are further
subdivided into: eosinophils, basophils and neutrophils.
They have a single but segmented nucleus .

They have few organelles, condensed nucleus
(heterochromatic, with no obvious nucleolus).

They are end cells that will not divide or regenerate
their lost organelles so they have short life span and are
compensated by new cells from the bloodstem cells.
1- Neutrophils (Polymorphonuclear leukocytes,
PMNs, Microphages)

Neutrophil is a highly motile cell, with great phagocytic
activity.

It is considered the first line of defense against any
foreign invader.

Percentage: 60-75 % (the most common type of
leukocytes).
Life span : very short, about 3-4 days.

Diameter:10-12µm.
LM :
Nucleus : single, segmented , formed of 2-5lobes ,
which are connected with thin chromatin threads, darkly
stained, very variable in shape and number of segments
(so called polymorphonuclear leukocytes).
Cytoplasm: stippled, stains light pink (neither
acidophilic nor basophilic), due to:

1 specific granules : numerous, fine neutrophilic
granules.

2- Azurophilic granules: few, larger granules that stain
purple with azurestain.
EM:
•Nucleus: may appear as many segments, with condensed heterochromatin
and no nucleolus.
• Cytoplasm:
- Highly irregular cell boundaries (due to pseudopodia).
- Peripheral microfilaments & microtubules, to help amoeboid movement.
- Few organelles (few mitochondria, rER& small Golgi), abundant glycogen
granules (which provides energy to the cells after they leave the blood
stream).
Contains two types of granules:
1- Primary (azurophilic) granules:

 Large, oval or rounded, dark and less numerous (20%),
they contain hydrolytic enzymes as acid hydrolase and
myeloperoxidase.
 They correspond to primary lysosomes.
2- Secondary (specific) granules:
 Smaller, elongated, pale, but with variable densities.
 They are more numerous (80 %).
 They contain phagocytin(a bactericidal protein),
lactoferrin (abacteriostatic iron-binding protein)
&collagenase.
Functions
1- Phagocytosis of any foreign invader:

 Bacterial toxins attract neutrophils from blood to C.T.
 They squeeze between the capillary endothelium, to
become active phagocytic cells in C.T. (microphages),
which engulf bacteria forming phagosomes.
2- Secretion of proteolytic enzymes:

First, specific granules, then the azurophilic granules fuse
with the phagosome, discharging their enzymes to destroy it
by their bacteriostatic effect (which attract iron from
bacteria to stop their growth) and their bactericidal effect
(which kills bacteria).

Second, collagenase and hydrolytic enzymes cause lysis of
the bacteria and surrounding tissues.
3- Production of pus & pyrogens:

 The toxins liberated from the bacteria cause death of neutrophils
forming pus cells.

 Dead neutrophils (pus cells) and destroyed C.T. debris, micro-
organisms and tissue fluid form a yellowish semi-liquid called
pus.

Toxins & pus produce substances called pyrogens that elevate the
body temperature (fever) and inhibit the growth of bacteria.
These pyrogens stimulate the heat regulating centers in the brain.
4- Attraction of monocytes to the site of infection: to
clean the area byphagocytosis of cellular debris & pus,
as the monocytes have longer lifespan.

5-Secretion of trephone substances which help healing
of wounds.

6- Stimulation of bone marrow: to produce more
neutrophils during infection.
Neutrophilia:
It is the increase in the number of neutrophils above
75%.
It occurs in cases of acute inflammation: e.g.
abscesses, acute tonsillitis and acute appendicitis.
Neutropenia:

It is the decrease in number of neutrophils below 60%.

It occurs in cases of damage or depression of bone
marrow, where the blood cells are formed, e.g. exposure
to irradiation, toxins, some viral infections as influenza,
prolonged use of some antibiotics and typhoid fever
2- Eosinophils
• They are the regulatory cells in allergic inflammation.
• They have functional correlation with basophils and mast cells.
• They are motile, but with a limited phagocytic activity.
Percentage: 2-4 %.
Life span: 8-10 days.
Diameter: 12 -14 µm.
Distribution: in C.T. under the mucous membranes of
GIT & respiratory tract.
LM:

Nucleus: dark and bilobed (horse-shoe
shaped),connected with a thick chromatin thread, with
no obvious nucleolus.

Cytoplasm:deeply acidophilic as it is packed with
specific granules which are prominent, coarse
,acidophilic, shiny red (refractile) granules.
EM:

Nucleus: appears as 2 segments, which are
heterochromatic, but less condensed than neutrophils
with no obvious nucleolus.

Cytoplasm: contains few organelles and two types of
granules:
1- Specific granules: They are large, oval (ellipsoid),
membrane-bound with electron-dense crystalloid core
(internum), formed of basic protein which his the cause of
acidophilia in LM, embedded in granular matrix(externum) of
hydrolytic_enzymes (histaminase and sulphatase).

2- Azurophilic granules: They are small, rounded with moderate
density.

They contain non-specific lysosomal enzymes.
Functions:

Eosinophils are attracted (chemotactically) to the site of
allergy by eosinophil chemotactic factor, secreted with
histamine and heparin by mast cells & basophils (when
stimulated with an antigen). They try to reduce and
localize the allergic reaction by the following ways:
Destroy histamine & heparin by histaminase and
sulphatase (i.e. terminates the allergic reaction).

Engulf antigen-antibody complexes.

Killing & inactivation of parasitic larvae: by
discharging the basic protein in the crystalloid core of
their granules on their surface. This protein is cytotoxic
for the parasites.
Eosinophilia:
 Increase in number more than 5%. It occurs in:
1- Allergic diseases: bronchial asthma, eczema, urticaria.
2- Parasitic diseases: Ascariasis, Bilharziasis.
Eosinopenia:

Decrease in numberless than 1%. It occurs with
cortisone treatment (inhibits their formation in bone
marrow).
3- Basophils
Percentage: The least type (the rarest), 0-1%. They are
difficult to be seen in blood film.
Life span: 10-15 days.
Diameter: nearly the same as neutrophils , 10-12 µm.
LM:

Nucleus: is divided into two irregular
segments(bilobed), twisted to form an S-shape.

Cytoplasm:is filled with basophilic specific granules,
which are large (obscuring the nucleus),irregular in size
and few in number.
EM:

Nucleus: heterochromatic, but less condensed than
neutrophils.

Cytoplasm: few rER, small Golgi, few mitochondria
and some glycogen. It is full of granules, which are two
types:
1- Specific granules: are large and membrane-
bound. They contain histamine, heparin and
eosinophil chemotactic factor.

2-Azurophilic granules: small, represent
lysosomes and contain hydrolytic enzymes.
Functions:

Basophils play little role in some allergic reactions (due
to their few number).They supplement the function of
mast cells, i.e. activated in immediate hypersensitivity
reactions (anaphylaxis), through their surface IgE
receptors, similar to those of mast cells. On migrating to
the C.T., their functions are accomplished by:
•Secretion of histamine (causes vasodilatation increasing
capillary permeability) and heparin (anticoagulant).
• Release of eosinophil chemotactic factor (attracts
eosinophils to site of allergy).
• Slightly motile with very limited phagocytic activity.
Basophilia:

(increase in their percentage) occurs in some viral
diseases as chicken pox and liver cirrhosis. Also in cases
of allergic and parasitic diseases.
II/ Non-Granular Leukocytes

• They are two types of leukocytes, namely lymphocytes
& monocytes, which contain no obvious stainable
specific granules, but still contain small azruophilic
granules which contain hydrolytic enzymes.

• Their nuclei are not lobulated.
1- Lymphocytes

• They are the functioning units of the specific immune
response (the 2nd line of the body defense against foreign
invaders).

• They are immune competent cells as they have surface
receptors, which enable them to distinguish the self from
the non-self so can identify different antigens.
Percentage: 20-30% (2nd common type).
Life span: Varies from days to few years,
according to type & function.
Diameter: Two size ranges can be found in
peripheral blood:
• Small lymphocytes:
- They represent most of the lymphocytes in circulating
blood, i.e. 15-20%.
- Their diameter is small (6-8 µm), nearly the same size
of RBCs.
• Large lymphocytes:
- Few lymphocytes 5-10%. They appear medium sized
or large (12-15 µm).
- They may represent different stages of activated
lymphocytes.
LM:

• Nucleus: large and rounded (not lobulated).

- In small lymphocytes it is deeply stained, condensed
with no obvious nucleolus. It is very large, occupying
most of the cell volume, leaving only a thin rim of
cytoplasm difficult to be seen under LM.

- In large lymphocytes, it is slightly paler in staining,
less condensed, with aprominent nucleolus.
Cytoplasm:

In small lymphocytes, it is very scanty (thin rim around
the nucleus), not apparent in LM.

In large lymphocytes, cytoplasm is more abundant and
basophilic, with no specific stainable granules, but few
azurophilic granules.
EM:
• Nucleus:
- In small lymphocytes, it has highly condensed
heterochromatin.
- In large lymphocytes, nuclei are large, indented and
have fewer condensed chromatin with prominent
nucleolus.
• Cytoplasm:

- The cell membrane shows few short microvilli.

- In small lymphocytes, cytoplasm shows few organelles,
many ribosomes and few scattered mitochondria.

- In large lymphocytes, cytoplasm is more abundant, with
more ribosomes & polysomes, more developed organelles as
mitochondria, rER, Golgi and few azurophilic granules.
Distribution & mobility:

• Lymphocytes are actively motile, continuously moving between
lymphatic tissue, where they settle, and blood. They take the

"tennis-racquet“ appearance while moving, as they have a head

(containing the nucleus) & a tail (containing the rest of
cytoplasm).

• Lymphocytes are the only leukocyte which when leave the blood
stream, can return back to the circulation.
• They are found in blood, lymph & lymphatic tissue
(lymph node, spleen ,thymus, tonsils).

• They are also found under the wet epithelial
membranes of the gut ,respiratory & genital tracts. They
are also seen in saliva, where they can attack microbes.
Functions of lymphocytes:
They perform two types of immunity:
1- Cell mediated immunity.
2- Humoral immunity.
N.B:
1 - Immunity means being safe from re-infection.
2- Lymphocytes are not phagocytic cells.
Differences between small and large lymphocytes.
Classification of small lymphocytes:
Small lymphocytes are classified according to their
maturation sites &
functions into T and B lymphocytes and null cells:
• They arise from the same stem cell in the bone marrow.

• They differ in maturation & differentiation sites.

• There are no histological or morphological differences
between them, so they can’t be differentiated by light or
electron microscope. They can only be differentiated by
immunohistochemical staining as they differ only in their
surface receptors (markers).
1/ T-Lymphocytes:

• They represent about 75% of circulating lymphocytes.

• Their life span is long (1-2 years).

• The immature cells that will be T-lymphocytes, migrate
from the bone marrow to the thymus where they mature
and become programmed to recognize a particular antigen
(thymic education) by addition of certain polypeptide
molecules on their surfaces (receptors).
• The T-lymphocytes then leave the thymus back to
the circulation, taking the family name (T), to settle
in lymphoid organs as lymph nodes and spleen.

• They are continuously re-circulating from these sites
seeking for antigens.
Functions of T-lymphocytes:

• They provide cell mediated immunity (cellular immunity).

• T-cells attack foreign cells such as fungi, viruses, parasites and
tumor cells directly, i.e. cell to cell contact.

• When T-cells come in contact with the antigen to which they
respond, they are activated into large lymphocytes, which
undergo a series of divisions that gives a clone of identically
programmed T-cells.
• As regards the way of response to antigens, they form
subtypes. Some subtypes regulate antigen destruction
indirectly by helping other cells in immune reactions
(Regulators), while others kill target cells directly
(Cytotoxic).
Subtypes of T-lvmphocvtes (Regulators and Cytotoxic):
A) Regulators:
1- T-Helper cells:
• They are activated by interleukin-I secreted by
macrophages.
• They secrete interleukin-II, which helps activation of B-
lymphocytes.
2- T-Memory cells:

• They develop when an antigen attacks the body
for the first time, but they do not react to it. They
keep the memory of this antigen and remain in
lymphoid tissue for rapid response on second
exposure(secondary immune response).
3- T-Suppressor cells:
• They switch off the immune response when the
stimulus is removed.
• They suppress the immune response to self-
antigens (i.e. prevent autoimmune reactions)
• They suppress T-helper cells, and subsequently
control the B lymphocytes response.
B) Cytotoxic:

1- T-Cytotoxic: They kill foreign or abnormal cells by
direct contact and lysis, as virus infected cells, cancer
cells and fungi.
2- T-Killer cells:

When expose to antigen, they kill the antigenic cells by
releasing hormone-like factors called lymphokines such as
interferon(which inhibits viral replication), interleukin II
(which stimulates T-lymphocytes),macrophage activating
factors (which activate the phagocytic power of macrophages)
and colony stimulating factors (which stimulate
granulopoiesis). These cells contribute to graft rejection.
2/ B-Lvmphocvtes:

• They represent about 25% of circulating lymphocytes.

• Their life span is short (few weeks up to 3 months).

• They were named B lymphocytes as they were discovered
to develop in amass of lymphoid tissue called Bursa of
Fabricius present in birds. But in man, their maturation was
found to occur in the bone marrow.
• In the bone marrow they acquire surface receptors in
the form of immunoglobulin M (IgM), which are
programmed for a particular antigen.

• They settle in lymphoid tissue, and re-circulate
between blood and lymphoid tissue.
Functions of B-Lymphocytes:
1- Humoral Immunity:
- They are activated when exposed to their specific antigen, with the help
of interleukin II secreted by T-helper cells.
- The activated B-lymphocyte differentiates, enlarges, changes to
plasmablast, then plasma cell which secretes the specific antibody for the
original antigen (primary immune response).
- These antibodies circulate in the blood allover the body to meet the
antigen.
2- B-Memory cells: Some activated B-cells remain
in lymphatic tissue, to respond rapidly to the
second exposure for the same antigen, by
transformation into plasma cells, which secrete
antibody (secondary immune response).
Null cells:
• They are Non-T, Non-B cells that arise from the bone marrow
as undifferentiated lymphocytes, having neither T nor B cell
specific receptors.
• They can develop in the absence of the thymus.
• Percentage: They constitute about 5% of all circulating
lymphocytes.
• Size: They are larger than small lymphocytes (12-15 µm).
• Functions:

1- They act as cytotoxic Natural killer (NK), as they can
destroy foreign

cells directly (as viral infected cells, cancer cells, parasites and
fungi).

2- They may act as a reserve circulating undifferentiated stem
cells for lymphocytes.
Lymphcytosis:
it is the increase in the number of lymphocytes above
40%which occurs in:
1- Physiological in children.
2-Chronic infections: as Whooping cough, T.B.
(Tuberculosis), and Syphilis.
3- Leukemia.
Differences between T- and B-lymphocytes.
2- Monocytes (Macrophages in C.T.)
• The second type of non-granular leukocytes which lack
specific granules.
• They are highly phagocytic cells. They have an important
role in both the non-specific & specific immune responses.
• They leave the blood stream and migrate by amoeboid
motion to C.T., where they are called macrophages.
Percentage: 3-8%.
Life span: three days in blood stream and up to three
months in C.T.
Diameter: 14-18 µm (the largest leukocyte). It may
reach 30 µm in C.T.
LM:
• Nucleus:
- Large characteristic indented kidney-shaped, and
eccentrically placed.
- Pale, less intensely stained than other leukocytes,with one or
two obvious nucleoli.
• Cytoplasm:

Abundant, pale basophilic, grayish-blue in staining,
which gives the unclear frosted-glass appearance,
due to fine purple azurophilic granules (lysosomes),
but no specific granules.
EM:
• Nucleus:
- Less condensed peripheral chromatin, and extended
central chromatin.
- One or two nucleoli.
• Cytoplasm:
- The cell surface is irregular due to pseudopodia.
- Many vesicles are also seen on the surface (reflecting the
phagocytic activity).
- Small amount of rER and mitochondria.
- Prominent large Golgi apparatus (the origin of lysosomes).
- Large number of lysosomes appearing as dense granules,
which correspond to azurophilic granules in LM.
Sites & Distribution:

Monocytes are found in the peripheral blood for 3 days,
then leave to C.T. They are the phagocytic cells of the
blood.

• In C.T. they differentiate into macrophage system
(reticulo-endothelial system).
• They are given different names depending on the tissue they
reside in, e.g.
- in C.T.............. histiocytes,
- in lung.............dust cells,
- in liver.............von-kupffer cells,
- in brain............microglia.

N.B: In these tissues, macrophages remain stationary, like
watchful soldiers ever ready to attack and phagocytose invaders.
Functions of monocytes:
• Monocytes are the precursors of macrophages which phagocytose
microorganisms, dead cells, and dead neutrophils.
• The phagocytic cell of the blood: for bacteria, viruses & antigen-
antibody complexes.
• They can fuse to form giant cells to phagocytose large foreign
bodies.
• Antigen presenting cell to lymphocytes, and secretion of
interleukins.
Monocytosis:
Is the increased percentage above 8% which occurs in:
1- Chronic infections: as glandular fever, typhus,
syphilis & T.B.
2- Protozoal diseases as Malaria.
3- Lymphomas and monocytic leukemia.
Small non-nucleated, disc-like, cytoplasmic cell
fragments.

• In lower vertebrates, they are called thrombocytes as
they are nucleated.
Origin:

• Platelets arise in the bone marrow by fragmentation & detachment
(budding)from large cell in bone marrow (mega karyocytes).

• Mega karyocytes, in the bone marrow, protrude thin processes that
cross the wall of the sinusoids and fragment at their tips liberating the
platelet.

Number: 200,000-400,000/mm . They are found in aggregates &
clumps, which accounts for the wide range of their number.
Life span: 5-10 days, after which they are phagocytosed
by macrophages in the spleen. The spleen also acts as a
store for about 1/3 of the platelets.

Size: 2-4 µm in diameter.
LM:
They appear as non-nucleated, rounded or oval fragments
that can be differentiated into two concentric zones:
- Outer pale basophilic clear transparent zone called
hyalomere(hyalo =
glass, mere = piece).
- Central dark granular zone called granulomere.
EM:
• Platelets are covered with a thick glycoprotein cell
coat, which cause the
aggregation of platelets into clumps.
The surface is irregular due to protrusion of
pseudopodia.
Functions:
They play a vital role in controlling hemorrhage due to
blood vessel injuries via the following steps:
1- Platelet aggregation: to form a platelet plug as a first
step to stop bleeding.
2- Secretion of serotonin which is a vasoconstrictor.
3- Blood coagulation: where platelets, together with factors from the
blood plasma, deposit fibrin that forms a network trapping RBCs,
leukocytes and platelets to form a blood clot, or thrombus.

4- Clot retraction: the clot retracts due to contraction of platelet
microfilaments and ATP.

5- Clot removal: when blood vessel is restored by new tissue
formation, the clot is removed by interaction between the proteolytic
enzyme plasmin and the platelet lambda granules.
Platelet Disorders:

Thrombocytopenia (purpura):

It results from severe reduction in the number of
platelets. It is characterized by prolonged bleeding time,
and excessive bleeding after minor traumas due to
failure of platelets to seal injuries in blood vessels.
Dr/hani ahmed alanqar
consultant of pathology

     Cartilage
Definition

• Cartilage are modified type of connective
  tissue in which the extracellular matrix is
  hardened to provide rigidity , support and
  attachment for soft tissue.
Characters of cartilage:

• It resembles C.T. proper in that the cells
   are widely separated by a considerable
   amount of intercellular material (matrix).

• Being a type of C.T., it arises from primitive
   mesenchymal cells (UMCs).
• The matrix is rigid (firm) but flexible. It is
  formed of ground substance in which the
  cells & fibers are embedded.

• It is avascular (non-vascular), nourished by
  diffusion of O2 & nutrients from the
  surrounding C.T. or synovial fluid in the
  joint cavities.

• It has no lymph vessels or nerves.
• Cells are isolated in small cavities in the
   ground substance called lacunae
Functions of cartilage:

• Support soft tissues with some flexibility, tissue
  attachment & weight bearing.

• Keeps airway patent.
• Shock-absorbing, as it is resilient.
• Smooth sliding surface for joints (for easy

  movement of bones).
• Development and growth of bones, before and

  after birth.
Composition of cartilage:

like other C.T. it is formed of cells, fibers and
  ground substance:

• The Cells are called chondroblasts and
  chondrocytes.
• The Fibers are collagen and elastic fibers,
  which are embedded, in varying
  proportions, in the ground substance to
  form the matrix.

• The Matrix, which is abundant, firm &
  compact.
Types of cartilage:

  • There are three types of cartilage based on the
    amount of ground substance, relative
    abundance and type of fibers embedded in it,
    which makes the different types of cartilage vary
    in appearance and mechanical properties.

  • These types are hyaline, yellow elastic and
    white flbrocartilage.
Hyaline cartilage

 • has the typical structure of cartilage. The
   other types are considered as variants of
   its basic structure.

 • The most common type.
 • It appears translucent, with glassy

   appearance, (Hyalo = glass).
• Sites:
1.Fetal skeleton
2.Epiphyseal plate
3.Costal cartilage
4.Articular surface of bones
5.Respiratory passages (nose, larynx,

  trachea & bronchi).
Structure

• A) Perichondrium: it is a capsule-like
  structure formed of dense fibrous C.T.

• that surrounds the hyaline cartilage
  except at the articular surface of joints.

• It is formed of two layers:
• 1- Outer fibrous layer: white fibrous C.T.,
  formed of fibroblasts, which secrete the
  collagen fibers (Type I), it is rich in blood
  vessels & nerves.
• 2- Inner chondrogenic (cellular): rich in
  chondrogenic cells that differentiate into
  chondroblasts. They are flat or oval cells
  with dark basophilic cytoplasm, which
  secrete the matrix of cartilage &
  collagen(type II).
Functions of perichondrium:
•Nutrition of non-vascular cartilage (by

  diffusion).
• Formation of new cartilage cells during

  growth.
• Provides attachment for muscles.
• B) Cartilage Cells:

• 1- Chondroblasts :
• Origin: arise from mesenchyme (UMCs), which

  withdraw their processes, proliferate and
  become crowded. They are transformed into
  chondrogenic cells that enlarge and differentiate
  into chondroblasts which start to secrete the
  matrix.
Site: always on the surface of cartilage, at the
  inner aspect of perichondrium.

LM:
• Flat to oval or spindle in shape, with deep

  basophilic cytoplasm
• Flat oval pale stained nucleus, with

  prominent nucleolus.
• It can divide.
EM:

features of protein forming cells

(euchromatic  nucleus,  abundant

ribosomes, rER, large Golgi apparatus &

many mitochondria).
Functions:
1.Formation of cartilage matrix.
2.Formation of cartilage collagen (type II).
3. Cartilage growth from outside (appositional

  growth).
4. They secrete matrix and when surrounded

  with it they become called chondrocytes.
2- Chondrocytes: They are the mature
  cartilage cells.

• Origin: they develop from chondroblasts.
  When chondroblasts mature, they secrete
  enough matrix to be completely
  surrounded by it and imprisoned in
  lacunae, they are now called
  chondrocytes.
• LM.:
• Rounded with pale basophilic cytoplasm and central

   rounded dark nucleus.
• Rounded darkly stained central nucleus.
• Embedded in the matrix inside spaces called

   lacunae, either single forming primary lacunae or
   divide once or twice giving clusters of cells formed
   of 2 or 4, up to 8 cells in secondary lacunae
   surrounded by capsule of condensed matrix.
• The superficial cells are small, flat, oval and single in their
   lacunae & parallel to the surface.(young chondrocyte)

• The older cells (mature chondrocytes) become deeper in
   the matrix. They are rounded or triangular, with pale
   cytoplasm (rich in fat & glycogen which dissolve during
   preparation). They are found in groups (2, 4 & 8)
   surrounded with darkly stained capsule of matrix, which
   is due to more condensation of matrix ground substance
   (GAGs), forming a more basophilic line. This group of
   cells is called cell nest.
• NB:
• During life, chondrocytes completely fill the

  lacunae, but during tissue preparation, the cells
  frequently shrink, so the lacunae appear as
  empty spaces.
• EM.:
• Features of protein forming cells, in addition
  mature chondrocytes show large lipid droplets
  and glycogen granules
• Functions:
• Maintain the cartilage matrix, by

  continuous turnover, like the
  chondroblasts. They are responsible for
  the formation and secretion of matrix
  components.
• C) Fibers:
• Collagen fibers (type II), which are very fine

  type of collagen, embedded in the matrix.
  However they can’t be seen by LM and the
  ground substance appears homogenous, and
  transparent. This is because:
• - They are very thin, less than the resolution
  power of LM.
• - They have the same refractive index as
  the surrounding matrix.

• - N.B.: They can be seen after digestion of
  the matrix by enzymes.
• D) Ground substance (Matrix):

• It is produced by chondroblasts and
  chondrocytes.

• It is rubbery, homogenous, transparent and
  markedly basophilic. It also stains
  metachromatically with some basic stains.

• The matrix consists of: proteoglycans,
  glycoproteins and water(60%).
Yellow Elastic Cartilage

It is yellow in fresh state, more opaque &
  flexible.

Structure:
• Always covered by perichondrium.
• Has the same structure of hyaline
  cartilage, but with large number of
  branching elastic fibers embedded in the
  matrix forming a network that gives this
  type the yellow color, with few collagen
  fibers (type II).
• Cells are chondrocytes in lacunae that
  form small cell nests (mostly 2 cell
  isogenous groups).
Sites:
it is found where support with flexibility is

  required:
• Ear pinna.
• Eustachian tube.
• Epiglottis and some laryngeal cartilages
• External auditoiy canal.
• Functions:
•it is very flexible, recovers its shape after

  being deformed.
White Fibro Cartilage

•It is never surrounded with perichondrium.
•It is a tough type of cartilage which is

  important in bone to bone attachment.
•It has intermediate character between

  hyaline cartilage and Elastic Cartilage .
• Dense regular white fibrous C.T.
• Structure:
• • It is formed of dense collagen fibers (type

  I), present in parallel thick bundles.
  •Cartilage cells inside lacunae are present
  in rows between collagen bundles,
  embedded in very scanty matrix around
  them
Sites:
•Mandibular joint.
•Sternoclavicular joint.
• Intervertebral disc.
• Symphysis pubis.
• Cartilage around the hip (acetabulum) and

  shoulder (glenoid cavity) joints.
• Semilunar cartilages of knee joints.
Functions:
•It is a strong and tough type that can resist

  great tensile stretch.
•It attaches bone to bone with limited

  mobility.
Structure of the intervertebral disc:
•It is present between the bodies of two

   adjacent vertebrae.
•It is formed of an outer fibrous ring formed

   of white fibrocartilage (collagen type I),
   called annulus fibrosus, and an inner soft
   jelly-like inner mass containing collagen
   type II, called nucleus pulposus.
Growth of Cartilage

1- Appositional growth (Exogenous): It is
  the growth resulting from the addition of
  new layers of cartilage to the surface by
  the activity of the inner cellular layers of
  perichondrium (chondroblasts).
2- Interstitial growth: It is the growth of
  cartilage from inside by division of young
  chondrocytes which proliferate and
  produce matrix around them.
Healing of cartilage
cartilage has a limited ability to
repair, if extensively damage
the damage tear will be repaired
with fibrous tissue
                      Bone

Definition:
1-It is a hard ,strong and vascular type of connective tissue.

2-It is formed as any C.T of 3 main components , bone cells & fibers (collagen type
I ) embedded in solid matrix

3- The matrix is solid due to deposition of mineral salt (mainly calcium and
phosphorus) in osteoid tissue

4-Bone is covered from external surface by a specialized fibrous C.T membrance
(the periosteum)and lined from the internal surface by loose cellular C.T layer(the
endosteum) in most areas
Function of bone:

• Support
• Protection (protect internal organs)
• Movement (provide leverage system for skeletal muscles,
 tendons, ligaments and joints)
• Mineral homeostasis (bones act as reserves of minerals
 important for the body like calcium or phosphorus)
• Hematopoiesis: blood cell formation
• Storage of adipose tissue: yellow marrow
Shape:(anatomical classification)

1- long bone e.g bone of limbs
2- short bones e.g bones of hand & feet
3-flat bones e.g scapula , ribs , sternum
4- irregular bones e.g vertebrae

Type of bone (histological classification)

1- compact (regular) or ivory bone
2- cancellous (irregular) or spongy bone
Structure of bone:

A- Bone matrix
B- Bone cells (osteogenic cells ,osteoblast , osteocytes
& osteoclast)
C- Periosteum & Endosteum
                        A – Bone matrix:

It consists of closely packed layers (lamellae) of calcified collagen
bundles, embedded in amorphous intercellular substance.

1- Organic component (osteoid):35% of bone weight, consists of :-

-Fibers: collagen fibers mostly type I which form 90% of the organic
portion that’s is why bone matrix is highly acidophilic in decalcified
H&E

-Ground substance : rich in carbohydrate &protein(proteoglycans
and glycoprotein)

The organic part of matrix is secreted by the bone cells
2- Inorganic component: 45% of bone weight formed mainly of ca

phosphate , carbonate , citrate and hydroxide. It also contain magnesium ,
potassium and sodium . The crystals of ca phosphate and hydroxide appear as
plates or needles like crystals called hydroxyapatite crystals ,that lie alongside
collagen fibers and contribute for the lamellar appearance of bone

3-water: 20%
                                       B- Bone cells

There are 4 types of bone cells:

1- Osteogenic cells (osteoprogenitor cells):

Origin : UMCS & pericytes . It is the stem cell derived from embryonic
mesenchyme .

Site : at the inner layer of periosteum and in the endosteum .

LM : flat cells with flat dark nuclei & pale basophilic cytoplasm .

EM :FEW ORGANELLES (ribosome & centrioles ) , i.e. features of mitotically active
cells

Functions:

• It is the main stem cell that gives origin to other types of bone cells . They are
 active in bone growth during embryonic life . In adults , they are active during
 bone fractures and repair .

• In low O2 tension ( avascular medium ) they may change into chondrogenic cell .
2- Osteoblasts ( bone forming cells):

origin : osteogenic cells .

Site : at the inner cellular layer of the periosteum and in the
endosteum (always at the growing surfaces of bone ).

LM :

• Oval branched cells with few processes , rounded eccentric pale
 nuclei & prominent nucleoli . The cytoplasm is deeply basophilic .it
 may show an unstained area called negative Golgi image .

• Its cytoplasm is very rich in alkaline phosphatase enzyme .

• When these cells are active in bone formation , they increase in
 height and are seen arranged on the bony surfaces giving an
 epithelial –like appearance as a layer of oval , cubical or columnar
 cells , but with gaps between cells .
EM: All features of actively secreting cells : extensive rER , large Golgi
,many free ribosome ,plenty of mitochondria and many secretory
vesicles .

Function :

They are the bone building cells as they are responsible for :

1. Synthesis of organic matrix of bone (osteoid)

2. Secretion of alkaline phosphatase which attracts the Ca salts from
    blood to be deposited in the matrix around osteoblasts and their
    processes .

3. When osteoblasts are surrounded with the newly formed matrix ,
    imprisoned in spaces called lacunae .they mature and transform
    into osteocytes .
3- osteocytes (mature bone cells):

Origin : osteoblasts .

Sites : present singly inside bony lacunae , between bone lamellae .
Cells are communicated with each other through the canaliculi ,
which connect lacunae .

LM :

• Smaller than osteoblasts .

• Oval ,flat ,branched cells with small oval dark nuclei , faint
 basophilic cytoplasm .

• Each cell lies inside a small cavity ( lacuna ) and lacaunae are
 connected by canaliculi through which osteocyte processes are
 connected by gap junctions .
EM: Features of active cells ,but they contain less rER and
smaller Golgi than osteoblasts . The cells have thin processes
that extend inside the cylindrical bony canaliculi in which the
adjacent cell processes of the neighboring osteocytes are
connected by gap junctions , so the cells are
intercommunicated . They also contain alkaline phosphatase .

Functions: it is the bone maintaining cell (bone preserver )

1. Maintains bone matrix by formation of collagen fibers &
   glycoproteins .

2. Maintains the hardness of the matrix by continuous
   deposition of Ca salts ( continuous exchange between bone
   & blood ).
4-Osteoclasts (bone destroying cells):

It is a multinucleated giant cell .

Origin :formed by fusion of many blood monocytes .

Sites :at the bony surfaces undergoing resorption ,in a shallow depression near
the bone marrow cavity produced by their erosive action called howship’s
lacuna .

LM :very large cell (up to 150 µm ),with foamy acidophilic cytoplasm and
multiple nuclei (up to 50 ) . The cell

surface facing the bone is ruffled or striated (brush border) .

EM:

• The surface facing the bone (ruffled border ) , consists of finger-like processes
 projecting from the cell membrane to the bone surface (bone resorption
 occurs here )

• The cytoplasm contains many mitochondria , Golgi , ribosomes characteristic
 vesicles , vacuoles & many lysosomes .
Functions: bone eating cell . It is responsible for bone
remodeling during growth or after fractures . The function
is produced by :

• Release of hydrogen ions (H+) by the action of its

carbonic anhydrase enzyme , which produce an acidic

medium that dissolves  ca salts

__>decalcification and absorption of minerals .

• Their lysosomal enzymes (acid phosphatase , collagenase
 & proteolytic enzyme ) lead to lysis of organic matrix
 (bone resorption or erosion ).
                                C. Periosteum & Endosteum
All bones except at joint surfaces are covered both at the external and internal
surfaces with a layer formed of vascular C.T. and bone forming cells.

                          a) The periosteum

It is the vascular non –calcified C.T. sheath covering the bone outer surfaces . It
consists of :
1. Outer fibrous layer :a layer of dense collagenous C.T. , of collagen fibers &

    fibroblasts . It is very rich in blood vessels , which will penetrate to inside
    the bone .
2. Inner osteogenic (cellular ) layer : It is more cellular ,formed of closely
    arranged osteogenic cells , which can divide and differentiate into
    osteoblasts , which are also seen in this layer .
Function of periosteum :
1. Nutrition ( supplies bone with blood )
2. Muscle attachment .
3. Repair of fractures.
4. Apposional growth .
b- The Endosteum:

• It lines all internal surfaces and cavities within the
 bone(marrow cavities).

• It is formed of single layer of osteogenic cells and
 osteoblasts with little amount of loose C.T. it supplies
 osteogenic cells and osteoblasts for growth and repair
 of bone.
                       Histological study of bone

A- compact bone

• It is highly organized hard C.T , dense and mature

• It is present in the shafts of long bones , inner and outer table of flat bones
 and outer covering of short irregular bones.

• It is the solid or ivory type of bone (mature bone), in which the bone is
 formed of layers called lamellae.

• A bone lamella is a thin plate of bone formed of calcified collagen bundles
 and mineral salts deposited in ground substance around it

• Between the lamellae are small spaces or lacunae in which osteocytes are
 present

• Lamellae are arranged parallel to each other or concentrically regularly
 arranged around blood vessels. They are organized on long bone into sets of
 concentric rings ,called osteon or haversian systems
• Each osteon includes a central channel , the haversian canal , which
 contain a blood vessels in its center . The long axis of the osteons is
 ususally parallel to the long axis of bone.

• Note: Long bones formed of a shaft called diaphysis , and two ends called
 epiphysis . In between the diaphysis and epiphysis in growing bones ,
 there is a cartilage plate called epiphyseal plate

• Methods of preparation of bone section:

• 1- Decalcified bone section: ca salts are dissolved by treating the bone with

 mineral acid as nitric acid 10%

• 2-Ground bone section: bone is left to dry in air then grinding or sawing it

 into thin transparent slices. Thin section are mounted on the slides , examin
 without stain
             1- decalcified compact bone

Transverse section of long bone , which is decalcified and stained with
H&E , it consists of :

Periosteum: covers the bone outside , formed of 2 layers:

Outer fibrous layer: formed of collagen fibers , fibroblasts , fibrocytes
and blood vessels.

Inner cellular layer of osteogenic cells and osteoblasts

External circumferential lamellae: bone lamellae present under the
periosteum and arranged in layer parallel to the circumference of the
bone, enclosing osteocytes in their lacunae in between them
Haversian systems (osteons): the structure units of compact bone.

• They are cylindrical structures running parallel to the long axis of
 bone

• Each is formed of concentrically arranged bone lamellae (5-20)layers,
 around a vascular channel (Haversian canal) which contain blood
 vessels , nerves and loose C.T . Osteocytes inside their lacunae are
 embedded between bone lamellae , lacunae are connected together
 by canaliculi through which they get their nutrition

Volkmanns canals: are they communicating transverse canals , linking

the Haversian canal in the Haversian systems with one another and
with the periosteum and bone marrow cavity to get better nutrition
Internal circumferential lamellae: bone lamellae surrounding the

bone marrow cavity and parallel to endosteum lining it.

Interstitial lamellae : present in between the haversian system . They

consist of irregularly arranged lamellae

Endosteum: lines the central marrow cavity and consists of one layer

of osteogenic cells and osteoblasts with little amount of ct

Perforating fibers of sharpey: they are calcified collagen fibers that

arise from tendons and ligaments at the site of muscle attachment
                B – Spongy (cancellous) bone

It is an irregular type of bone which bone doesn’t have a lamellar
structure . It is the first bone to form during fetal life and during bone
repair

Site: present in the center of epiphysis , flat and irregular bones

Structure:

• It is formed of branching and anastomosing irregular bone
 trabeculae, which form a meshwork .osteocytes in their lacunae and
 embedded in these trabeculae.no haversian systems

• The trabeculae enclose multiple irregular bone marrow cavities
 containing blood forming cells ,fat cells and blood vessels . This
 arrangement gives the spongy appearance
              Formation of bone (Ossification)

Bone is formed from mesenchymal tissue in the embryo. There are two methods
for bone development or ossification:

1- Intramembranous ossification: in flat bones as skull , mandible , maxilla &

clavicle which develop within a condensed mesenchymal membrane.

2- Intracartilagenous or endochondral ossification: as in long bones ,

which develop by replacement of pre-existing cartilage model.
N.B: Primary bone is formed first and is later replaced by secondary mature bone.
                  Intramembranous ossification

This type of ossification occurs in flat bone
1-the site of the future bone is occupied with mesenchymal membrane.
2-the starting point for ossification is the appearance of a highly vascular
area in the middle of this membrane called the primary ossification
center. The mesenchymal cells (UMCS) condense , proliferate and
differentiate into osteogenic cells
3-osteogenic cells increase in size and number and differentiate into
osteoblastic cells.
4-osteoblasts divide and synthesize organic matrix (osteoid)(collagen type
I ,proteoglycans & glycoproteins), secrete it around themselves. They also
secrete alkaline phosphatase which stimulates the deposition of ca salt in
the matrix around them & their processes.
5-when osteoblasts are trapped in their own matrix inside lacunae
surrounded with calcified matrix , they are called osteocytes.
Intracartilagenous (endochondral) ossification

• This type of bone formation occurs in long bones of limbs and takes
 place by replacement of cartilage model .

• Development of cartilage model :

• In the embryo , a limb bud of mesoderm outgrows , condenses and
  takes the shape of the future bone .

• The mesenchymal cells ( in the avascular environment )
  differentiate into chondroblasts which produce cartilage matrix
  ,resulting in the development of a model hyaline cartilage .
  Perichondrium , made up of outer fibrous and inner chondrogenic
  layer also develops at its periphery.

• The cartilage model grows by appostional and interstitial methods .
• Cartilage is replaced by bone: through the following steps:

A-Primary center of ossification: which starts to appear at the center
of cartilage model (diaphysis) where the following changes occur
simultaneously :

1-The chondrocytes at the middle of the cartilage model proliferate ,
enlarge (hypertrophy) and mature. Calcium salts start to be
deposited in the matrix around their lacunae , leading to their
deprivation from the nutrition. Chondrocytes then die and leaving
empty lacunae , separated by calcified cartilage matrix which
basophilic in H&E stain.

2- The perichondrium becomes more vascular & active so
mesenchymal cells differentiate into osteoblasts which start to lay
down a thin collar of bone matrix in the inner layer of the
perichondrium (now it become periosteum)
3- Osteoclast open holes in the bone collar allowing periosteal capillaries
and osteogenic cells and UMCS (vascular bud) to invade the cavities
inside the model.

4- The osteogenic cells attach themselves to the remnants of the
basophilic calcified cartilage matrix and then change to osteoblasts,
which start to lay bone matrix (acidophilic) in an irregular manner
( spongy bone)

5-Remodling : osteoclast start to resorb the irregular trabeculae in the
center , lead to formation of a single marrow cavity in which
mesenchymal cells gives the bone marrow cells . At the same time ,
osteoblasts deposit new bone to preserve the general shape of bone
during growth

6- Zone of ossification and Haversian system formation: concentric
bone lamellae produced by osteoblast are deposit around the blood
vessels to form Haversian canal
Secondary center of ossification: appear after birth in the two end of the

developing bone (epiphyses) , which are still cartilage by increase vascularity.

1-Chondrocytes in the center of the epiphysis proliferate , enlarged and
mature then deposit ca salts in the matrix around them. This is followed by
death of chondrocytes leaving “empty spaces” in the middle of the
epiphysis.

2- Capillaries & osteogenic cells invade the cartilage through the holes
produced by osteoclast.

Osteoblast lay down bone matrix forming secondary ossific center.

Thus the cartilage at the middle of the two head is replaced by spongy bone
Except in two regions:

-Epiphyseal plate: between epiphysis & diaphysis which is left for growth till
age of 21-23 ys.

-Articular cartilage : which will never ossify throughout life.
Postnatal growth of bone:

1-growth in width (appositional growth): by continuous
deposition of new compact on the outer surface under the
periosteum and continuous bone resorption of old bone
from inside by osteoclasts this leads to the increase in the
diameter of bone and also the bone marrow cavity increase
in size.
2- growth in length (interstitial growth): occur in the
epiphyseal plates , where proliferation of cartilage take
place . At the age of 21-23 ys ossification is complete and
growth stops with no further proliferation of cartilage and
the epiphyseal disc is completely ossified
The epiphyseal plate (growing end of bone):

During growth of long bones , the epiphyseal plate has a
characteristic microscopic appearance ( where intracartilagenous
ossification occurs ). The study of a longitudinal section of growing
bone reveals distinct histological zones ,beginning with the
epiphyseal side of the plate ( the stages of intracartilagenous
ossification ) in the following zones :

1. Zone of resting cartilage : a reserve zone formed of hyaline
   cartilage where the cells are small , inactive , and irregularly
   arranged .

2. Zone of proliferation :( increase in number ) ,chondrocytes
   undergo repeated mitosis , and arrange in parallel rows separated
   by bars of matrix .
3. Zone of cell maturation & hypertrophy : the chondrocytes
are greatly enlarged ,and acquire high glycogen and alkaline
phosphatase content . The cartilage matrix between
neighboring cells becomes thin .

4.Zone of calcification : mature chondrocytes secrete alkaline
phosphatase content m which deposit Ca in the thin cartilage
matrix . This will cut the nutrition from chondrocytes .

▪ The trapped chondrocytes will die leaving their lacunae
 empty .

▪ Lacunae will break and join leaving large empty spaces.
5.Zone of invasion : vascular bud(capillaries & osteogenic cells)
invades the empty spaces in the calcified matrix through holes
produced by the action of osteoclasts .

6.Zone of ossification ( spongy bone formation ) : the osteogenic
cells change inti osteoblasts which lay down bone matrix on the
calcified cartilage remnants . The resulting bone trabeculae fuse
forming spongy bone .

7. Remodeling :This is done by osteoclasts ,which resorb bone
trabeculae from certain areas, while osteoblasts deposit new
bone , to preserve a single marrow cavity and general shape of
bone during growth .
8. Zone of ossification & Haversian system formation : concentric
bone lamellae ,produced by osteoblasts ,are deposit from the
outer to the inner aspect of a space in the spongy bone
containing blood vessels , until the cavities are reduced to be
the central canals(Haversian canals ).
Bone Repair :

• Bone fracture leads to damage of bone matrix , and bone cell
 in the region as well as blood vessels supplying the area .

• Hemorrhage is followed by the formation of blood clot .
 Macrophages remove the damaged tissues .

• Fibroblasts proliferate in the periosteum and endosteum and
 surround the area externally and internally , forming fibrous
 tissue between the two broken ends

• Osteogenic cells , from the periosteum and blood capillaries
 migrate to the area of the clot , starting deposition of bone ,
• Also chondrogenic cells differentiate , starting to lay cartilage
 matrix . This mass of tissue formed of cartilage and bone at
 the site of the organized clot is called callus .

The callus :

• It is the organized clot formed of cartilage , which will be replaced by
 bone ,the primary bone .

• Finally excess bone in the callus is resorbed and is replaced by
 secondary bone and union of the two end of the fracture is complete
Joints

■Joints are places where bones meet, or articulate, allowing at least
the potential for bending or movement in that portion of the skeleton.
■Joints with very limited or no movement are classified collectively
as synarthroses and freely mobile joints are called diarthroses.
■Intervertebral discs are synarthroses in the vertebral column which
cushion adjacent vertebrae.
■Each intervertebral disc consists of a thick outer layer of fibrocartilage
forming a tough annulus fibrosus and a shock-absorbing inner, gel-like
core, the nucleus pulposus.
■Diarthroses have a joint cavity filled with lubricant synovial fluid,
enclosed within a tough, fibrous articular capsule; ends of the bones
involved are covered with hyaline articular cartilage.
■Specialized connective tissue of the synovial membrane lines the
capsule, with folds extended into some areas of the joint cavity.
■Macrophage-like synovial cells of the synovial membrane remove
wear-and-tear debris from synovial fluid.
■Fibroblast-like synovial cells of the synovial membrane synthesize
hyaluronan which moves into the synovial fluid with water from local
capillaries to lubricate and nourish the articular cartilage.
 Nervous Tissue

Dr.Hani Ahmed Alanqar
Consultant of pathology
 Neurons:
 Classification of Neurons:
According to number of processes:
According to function:
According to length of axon:
 Structure of Neurons:
Cell body (Perikaryon):
Processes:
Nerve Fiber:
 Types of nerve fibers:
 Ganglia
 Nervous tissue is divided anatomically into the
  central nervous system consisting of brain and
  spinal cord and peripheral nervous system
  composed of nerve fibers, nerve ganglia and nerve
  endings.

 Structurally, nerve tissue consists of two cell types:
  nerve cells (neurons) and glial cells.
 They are responsible for reception, transmission and processing
   of stimuli; the release of neurotransmitters; and triggering certain
   cell activities.

 Most of neurons consist of 3 parts; the cell body (perikaryon)
   which is the trophic center for the whole nerve cell and is also
   receptive to stimuli, the dendrites which are multiple processes
   and the axon which is a single process.
 According to number of processes:

 Unipolar: have a single process that is close to the
  perikaryon and divides into 2 branches to form a T
  shape, with one branch extending to a peripheral
  ending to act functionally as a dendrite but its structure
  is similar to that of axon and the other towards the
  central nervous system to represent the axon.
 The stimuli that are picked by the dendrites travel
  directly to the axon without passing through the
  Perikaryon. It is found in the spinal ganglia(the
  sensory ganglia in the dorsal roots of the spinal
  nerves) and mesencephalic nucleus of trigeminal
  nerve.
 NB: This type has been referred to, in the past, as a
  pseudounipolar neuron as from the functional point of
  view it is bipolar but this term has now been
  discarded.
Bipolar: have one dendrite and one axon.
  This type is present in cochlear and
  vestibular ganglia in ear, retina in eye
  and the olfactory mucosa.
Multipolar: have one axon and many dendrites. They
  take different forms:

■ Stellate as the anterior horn cells in spinal cord.
■ Pyramidal as pyramidal cells in cerebral cortex.
■ Pyriform as purkinje cells in cerebellar cortex.
According to function:
Sensory (efferent) neurons receive sensory stimuli as cells

   of dorsal root ganglion.
Motor (afferent) neurons control effector organs such as

   muscles and glands as anterior horn cells in spinal cord.
Interneurons connect neurons as in retina and spinal cord.
According to length of axon:

Golgi type 1: neurons have long axon that leaves the grey
   matter and enters white matter as motor neurons in spinal
   cord, pyramidal cells in cerebral cortex and purkinje cells
   in cerebellar cortex.

Golgi type 2: neurons have short axon that does not leave the
   area of Perikaryon and never enters the white matter as in
   interneurons in cerebral and cerebellar cortex.
Cell body (Perikaryon):

It is the part of the neuron containing the
   nucleus and surrounding cytoplasm.

Size: varies from 4 ɱm as in granular cells in

   cerebellar cortex to 100 ɱm as in motor
   neurons in spinal cord.
Shape: depends on the number of cell processes;
- Pseudounipolr have globular shape.
- Bipolar have fusiform shape.
- Multipolar are stellate, pyramidal or pyriform.
Nucleus:
It is usually large spherical, euchromatic with a

  prominent nucleolus reflecting the intense synthetic
  activity of these cells.
Cytoplasm:

1. It contains highly developed rough endoplasmic reticulum and
   numerous polyribosomes suggesting that these cells
   synthesize both structural proteins and proteins for transport.
   When stained, rough endoplasmic reticulum and free
   ribosomes and polysomes appear under the light microscope as
   basophilic granular areas called Nissl bodies. Their number
   varies according to neuronal type and functional state. They
   are abundant in large nerve cells as motor neurons
2. The Golgi complex consists of multiple parallel smooth cistemae
   around the periphery of the nucleus.

3. Mitochondria are scattered throughout the cytoplasm.

4. Neurofilaments (intermediate filaments with a diameter of 10
   nm) are abundant in Perikaryon and processes. They bundle
   together as a result of the action of fixatives to form neurofibrils
   (2 ɱm in diameter) that are visible by the light microscope
   (stained brown by Ag). They provide structural support.
5. Microtubules (20-28 nm in diameter) are arranged in
  parallel bundles in Perikaryon and processes. They are
  involved in axonal transport of neurotransmitter
  substances, enzymes and other cellular constituents.

6. Centrioles cannot be seen as neurons can not divide.
7. Inclusions in the form of:
a. Lipofuscin pigment which is golden brown. It is a

  residue of undigested material by lysosomes. Its
  amount increases with aging.
b. Melanin pigment and iron containing pigment are
  present in cells of substantia nigra in mid brain.
    Processes:

Both the dendrites and axon have mitochondria, neurofibrils and microtubules.
Nerve Fiber:

A nerve fiber consists of an axon. The axon is covered by
  axolemma and contains cytoplasm called axoplam. It
  arises from a conical extension of the cell body called
  axon hillock.
Types of nerve fibers:
Unmyelinated nerve fibers: have no myelin sheath. It is

  subdivided into;
1. Unmyelinated fibers without sheath of Schwann cells

  (neurolemma) as in gray matter (naked)
2. Unmyelinated nerve fibers with sheath of Schwann

  cells as in sympathetic post ganglionic fibers.
Myelinated nerve fibers: have myelin sheath. It is
  subdivided into;

1. Myelinated nerve fibers without sheath of Schwann
  cells as in white matter .

2. Myelinated nerve fibers with sheath of Schwann cells
  as in peripheral nerve fibers .
 They are collections of nerve cells
  outside the central nervous system.

 They are of 2 types sensory (spinal) and

autonomic  (sympathetic  and

parasympathetic).
Differences between spinal and sympathetic ganglia:
